The behaviours of autonomous agents may deviate from those deemed to be for the good of the societal systems of which they are a part.
Norms have therefore been proposed as a means to regulate agent behaviours in open and dynamic systems, where these norms specify the obliged, permitted and prohibited behaviours of agents.
Regulation can effectively be achieved through use of enforcement mechanisms that result in a net loss of utility for an agent in cases where the agent's behaviour fails to comply with the norms.
Recognition of compliance is thus crucial for achieving regulation.
In this paper we propose a generic architecture for observation of agent behaviours, and recognition of these behaviours as constituting, or counting as, compliance or violation.
The architecture deploys monitors that receive inputs from observers, and processes these inputs together with transition network representations of individual norms.
In this way, monitors determine the fulfillment or violation status of norms.
The paper also describes a proof of concept implementation and deployment of monitors in electronic contracting environments.
In this section we review a recent general model of norms [18] that distinguishes some general normative concepts shared by some existing work on norms and normative systems [12,5], and which we adopt in this paper.
In [18], a norm N is modelled as a tuple:(N ormT ype,N ormActivation,N ormCondition, N ormExpiration,N ormT arget) where: N is said to come into force, or is activated, if the conditions, or state of interest, described by N ormActivation hold.
It is when N is activated, that one must monitor to ensure that the goal, or state of interest, described by N ormCondition:• must be brought about by N 's N ormT arget in the case that N 's N ormT ype is obligation;• may be brought about by N 's N ormT arget in the case that N 's N ormT ype is permission; or• must not be brought about by N 's N ormT arget in the case that N 's N ormT ype is prohibition.1 www.ist-contract.org Such states of interest describe states of the world in which actions have been performed (e.g., messages sent) or certain properties hold (e.g., 'the temperature is maintained above 23 degrees for at least 90% of the time').
Finally N 's N ormExpiration denotes the state of interest under which the norm is no longer in force.
Henceforth, we will refer to a norm's N ormActivation, N orm Condition and N ormExpiration as a norm's components.Note that in this paper we monitor the class of obligations whose violation can be determined with respect to some temporal condition holding.
Without a temporal condition on the satisfaction of an obligation to realise or achieve a state of affairs (an achievement obligation), it would not be possible to determine a point in time at which a violation had occurred.
Obligations to maintain certain states of affairs (maintenance obligations) often also explicitly reference temporal conditions that can be evaluated to determine violation (consider the above mentioned obligation to maintain the temperature for a certain period of time).
However, some maintenance obligations do not (e.g., an obligation to always drive on the left), and these will be considered further in future work in Section 6.
EXAMPLE 1.
Consider the norm -N ormGoods -that describes an obligation on the purchaser of goods G from a supplier S, where the purchaser is an organisational entity consisting of two agents: the buyer B and the financial department F :• N ormT ype = obligation• N ormActivation = B is notified by S that goods G are in stock• N ormCondition =• 1) B must cancel the order within 7 days of receipt of notification or • 2) B must accept the order within 7 days of receipt of notification and F must deposit payment for G in S's bank account, within 3 days of B's acceptance.
• N ormExpiration =• 1) B has canceled the order within 7 days of receipt of notification or • 2) B has accepted within 7 days of receipt of notification and S has received payment for G from F within 3 days of B's acceptance or• 3) S is declared bankrupt • N ormT arget = B, FRecall that N ormExpiration denotes the state of interest under which a norm is no longer in force.
The above example illustrates that a norm may be deemed to have expired for reasons other than that the norm's conditions have been fulfilled.
In principle, extra conditions of the type 'S is declared bankrupt' may be encoded as exceptions in the activation condition.
However, N ormGoods may then inappropriately remain in force; suppose that S goes bankrupt three days after B is notified by S that goods G are in stock.
The norm will remain in force if 'S is declared bankrupt' is not encoded in the expiration condition.Finally, note that a number of options obtain as to how one formally represents the states of interest described by a norm's components.
In the following section we discuss how these options are determined by issues such as ease of recognition and trust, and how the choice of option may determine the readiness with which agents are deployed in normative systems.
Enforcement mechanisms are required to motivate agent compliance with norms.
Hence, agent actions must be monitored; that is, they must be observed and recognised as complying with or violating norms, in order that the enforcement mechanisms can be appropriately applied.Monitoring of compliance requires detecting whether the states of interest described by N ormActivation, N ormCondition and N ormExpiration hold.
In the overhearing approach to monitoring [10], the agent behaviours that bring about states of interest are inferred from the messages exchanged.
This suffices when states are inherently described as ones in which messages have been sent and received (e.g.,N ormActivation in Example 1).
However, it may not be possible, or indeed desirable, to describe and recognise such states exclusively on the basis of exchanged messages.
Consider N ormCondition in Example 1, in which:F is obliged to deposit payment for G in S's bank account within 3 days of B's acceptance.Fulfilment of this obligation can be recognised by observing for F 's sending of a notification message to S, informing the latter that payment has been made.
However, to motivate deployment of S in a normative system containing the norm N ormGoods (e.g., as a signatory to an electronic contract specifying N ormGoods as a contractual clause), S must be assured that enforcement mechanisms will be applied if F does not pay.
If recognition of fulfilment is solely based on observing the above notification message, then this assurance equates with an assurance that the notification message is sent if and only if payment has in fact been made.
Of course, any such assurance would be questionable given that, if F has not made the payment, F can avoid sanction by still sending the notification message, since this will suffice to indicate fulfilment of the obligation.We thus propose that agents deployed in normative systems explicitly entrust particular observers to accurately relay observations to monitors 2 , where these observations may be of messages exchanged or of properties that describe some state of interest.
Thus, in the above example, agents F and S might explicitly entrust the bank itself to be an observer that reports to a monitoring agent that F has deposited the money.
Unlike the case of the notification message sent by F , no gain accrues to the bank if the bank mis-reports.
Alternatively, agents F and S could also entrust an observer other than the bank, to accurately report on both a message sent from F to S notifying that payment has been made, and a message sent from the bank to S notifying the latter that the money has been deposited (although observation of messages sent from banks would raise information privacy issues that may prove difficult to resolve).
Finally, consider the case in which a supplier is obliged to place a purchased book on an internet site for downloading by a purchaser, within 14 days of receiving payment.
In this case, the internet site can be ascribed trusted observer status, reporting to a monitor that the book has been placed.
In this section we describe our architecture for monitoring the behaviours of agents deployed in normative systems.
Trusted observers report to monitors on whether states of interests referenced 2 For example by stipulating contractual agreements as to which observers are to be trusted by norms' components, do or do not hold.
Monitors process these observations together with augmented transition network (ATN) [21] representations of norms.
In Section 4 we describe in detail how these ATNs represent the states of interest.
to their ATN representations, for input to the monitor (this input is provided off-line).
At run time, monitors subscribe to all observers entrusted with reporting on the states of interest identified by a norm's components (N ormActivation, N ormCondition and N ormExpiration).
The monitor can identify which observers to subscribe to, based on the ATN representation (as will be described in Section 4).
Notice that there is nothing in the specification of the monitor that ties it to a particular normative system.At run-time, observers notify monitors as to whether states of interest hold or not, by notifying monitors of: messages exchanged amongst agents, messages exchanged between agents and the environment, and predicates describing properties of the world (these properties may refer to actions having been performed).
For example, in the use case implementation in Section 5, a state of interest in which an engine e has been repaired may be described in terms of a message sent from the repairer of the engine informing another party that the engine has been repaired, or an inferred predicate engine_repaired(e) from some theory describing the environment.Notice that the observers are external to the normative system itself; their role is only to report on whether predicates hold or not, or on the sending and receipt of messages.
They are not responsible for any kind of processing of this information.
Thus, any environmental artifact can be assigned trusted observer status, including internet sites, human agents, banks, description logic reasoners, etc.Monitors process observations together with the ATN representations of the norms, to determine when a norm is activated, fulfilled or violated, or has expired.
Finally, the monitor informs manager agents of norms that have been violated, and of the agents responsible for violation.
Manager agents then in turn impose sanctions on responsible agents.Notice also that the choice of observers (and monitors) is application -specific, and agreed to by the agents whose behaviours are being observed, where such agreement constitutes a declaration of trust.
The behaviours of observers (and monitors) may themselves be governed by normative clauses, and thus observed and monitored for deviation from their expected behaviour.
This would reduce the potential for collusion (e.g., an agent dealing with eBay is more likely to trust a PayPal observer, even though PayPal is owned by eBay, if the behaviour of PayPal is itself normatively prescribed and sanctioned in case of violation).
ATNs [21] are essentially directed labelled graphs that were originally proposed for parsing complex natural languages.
In general, transitioning an arc from one ATN node to another is based on some processing of that arc's labels.
A basic ATN representation of a norm N is a three node ATN ({S1, S2, S3}, A1, A2), where A1 is the set of arcs connecting node S1 to node S2, and A2 is the set of arcs connecting node S2 to node S3.
Here, the transition from S1 to S2 corresponds to the activation of a norm, while the transition from S2 to S3 corresponds to the norm's fulfillment or violation.
The arcs are labelled so that, based on reports received from observers, the monitor matches the reports with the arc labels that describe the states of interest specified by N 's components, and then transitions the ATN from one node to the next, across the matched arc.
If the ATN remains at node S1, then N is not activated.
If the ATN is at node S2, then N is activated, and in the case of an obligation, if it remains at S2 after a given period of time identified by N ormCondition, then N is violated (the deadline is exceeded).
If the ATN is at node S3, then N is fulfilled if N is an obligation or permission, or violated if N is a prohibition (a prohibited state has been reached).
In what follows we describe in more detail the representation of norms as ATNs, and their processing by monitors.
A key requirement for norm representation and processing is to account for representation of complex behaviours and states of interest, possibly enacted and brought about jointly by multiple agents.
For example, consider N ormGoods (Example 1) in which the state in which the obligation is fulfilled is described by a disjunction of behaviours, where the second disjunct:B must accept the order within 7 days of receipt of notification and F must deposit payment for G in S's bank account, within 3 days of B's acceptance describes a conjunction of behaviours by two distinct agents B and F , where these obliged behaviours must satisfy some temporal constraints.
Recall also Section 3.1's suggested representation for detection of F must deposit payment for G in S's bank account, in terms of a notification message sent by F to S and a message from S's bank, to S, confirming receipt of the monies.In order to be able to represent such complex descriptions of behaviours and states of interest, we assume representation of each norm component in disjunctive normal form.
In Section 3 we described requirements for representing the states of interest described For anyby each norm component, in terms of messages exchanged, and/or predicate descriptions.
Such representations are obtained by a mapα i = β 1 ∧ . . . ∧ β m we let map_conj(α i ) = m j=1 map(β j )Notice that a predicate description may be of form happened( Act) where Act is an action, or may describe the post-conditions of an action.
The latter option may provide for more flexibility in terms of the actions executed to bring about the post-conditions describing the state of interest.
While Ob β j uniquely identifies the observer entrusted to report the messages or the truth of predicates in M β j , in practice, multiple observer identifiers may refer to the same observer.
Notice that the observer identifiers enable a monitor to identify which observers to subscribe to when processing ATNs.
and for the first disjunct in N ormCondition: { (Ob B_cancel , (send(B, S, cancel(G)),T 2), T 2 (T 1 + 7)) } and for the second disjunct in N ormCondition:{ (Ob B_accept , (send(B, S, accept(G)),T 3), T 3 (T 1 + 7)), (Ob S_bank , (deposited(F, S, Gcost),T 4), T 4 (T 3 + 3)) }We now define representation of a norm as an ATN:DEFINITION 2.
[Defining ATN representations of norms] Let N = (N ormT ype,N ormActivation,N ormCondition, N ormExpiration,N ormT arget), where:• N ormActivation = δ 1 ∨ . . . ∨ δ m • N ormCondition = 1 ∨ . . . ∨ nThe defined ATN is a three node labelled graph represented as a tuple ({S1, S2, S3},A1, A2) where:• A1 is set of arcs {(S1, S2) 1 , . . . , (S1, S2) m } such that for i = 1 . . . m, map_conj(δ i ) labels (S1, S2) i • A2is set of arcs {(S2, S3)1, . . . , (S2, S3)n} such that for i = 1 . . . n, map_conj(i) labels (S2, S3)i Figure 2a illustrates an ATN representation of a generic norm N , and Figure 2b shows the ATN representation of N ormGoods.
3 We assume FIPA communication standards, and represent message descriptions as tuples consisting of the message itself and its time stamp [h] map_conj(δ 1 )S1 S2 S3 map_conj(ε 1 ) map_conj(δ m ) map_conj(ε n ) a) S1 S2 S3 b) { ( Ob S_notify , (send(S,B,in_stock(G)) , T1), T1) } { ( Ob B_cancel , (send(B,S,cancel(G)) , T2), T2 =< T1+7) } { ( Ob B_accept , (send(B,S,accept(G)) , T3), T3 =< T1+7) , ( Ob B_bank ,(deposited(F,S,Gcost) , T4), T4 =< T3+3) } Figure 2: ATN representations of norms This section describes how monitors process reports received from observers, together with ATN representations of norms, in order to determine the status of norms.Consider a norm N represented as the ATN ({S1, S2, S3}, A1, A2).
If at least one arc in A1 or A2 is satisfied -by which we mean that observers report that the messages labelling the arc have been sent, and / or the predicate descriptions hold, and the temporal expressions labelling the arc are evaluated by the monitor to be true -then the monitor transitions the arc to the successor node (where S2 and S3 are the successors of S1 and S2 respectively).
If an arc δi in A1 is transitioned from S1 to S2, the monitor can communicate to a manager that N is activated, where the reasons for the activation are the messages and predicates labelling δ i .
If an arc i in A2 is transitioned from S2 to S3, and N is a permission or obligation, then the monitor can communicate to a manager that N is fulfilled, and if N is a prohibition, then the monitor can communicate to a manager that N is violated.
In either case, the reasons for the fulfillment or violation -the messages and predicates labelling i -can also be communicated to the manager.Finally, N ormExpiration represents conditions under which, if an ATN is in node S1, the norm is not activated (irrespective of whether an arc in A1 is satisfied), and if the ATN is in state S2, then the issue of the norm's fulfillment / violation no longer arises.
We have thus far not considered the case in which an obligation is violated.
We aim at representation and monitoring of obligations whose violation can be determined with respect to some temporal condition holding.
For example, in order that one can determine whether an obligation to bring about some state (an achievement obligation) is violated, reference is required to some point of time before which the state must be brought about.
Some maintenance obligations also explicitly reference a time period during which some state of affairs must be maintained.We thus define the notion of a time window, based on the temporal expressions labelling the arcs in A2.
Consider a modified version of Example 1 in which we simply have the obligation β 1 = 'B is obliged to cancel within 7 days of receipt of notification'.
This obligation can only be violated after 7 days after receipt of notification; 7 days is the time window for this obligation.
Consider also a modified version of Example 1 in which β2 ∧ β3 = 'B is obliged to accept within 4 days of notification and F pays within 6 days of notification'.
This obligation can only be violated after 4 days after receipt of notification.
Notice that if it is day 5, and B has not accepted, then the obligation is violated.
Now let us put these normative conditions together in a disjunct: β1 ∨ (β2 ∧ β3).
The time window in which the monitor must check for violation is now the maximum time window of all the disjuncts, i.e., 7 days.
To illustrate, consider the following scenarios:1.
Suppose it is day 6 and neither disjunct is satisfied.
The obligation is not violated since B still has a day left in which to cancel.2.
Suppose it is day 8 and B has accepted on day 5 after the notification and F has paid on day 5 after the notification.
The obligation is violated since neither disjunct is satisfied.3.
Suppose it is day 7 and B has accepted on day 4 after the notification and F has not yet paid.
The obligation is not violated since it can still be fulfilled by B by cancelling on day 7 4 .
In general then, we assume a defined function time_window that returns a temporal expression (e.g. '7 days after receipt of notification') which, if evaluated to true, and if none of the N ormCondition's arcs (in A2) are satisfied, then if the norm is an obligation, the norm is said to be violated.
Let A2 = {(S2, S3) 1 , . . . , (S2, S3) n }.
Then:• time_w_d : (S2, S3)i → T W D where T W D is a tempo- ral expression.
• time_window : { time_w_d((S2, S3) 1 ),. . ., time_w_d( (S2, S3) n )} → T W where T W is a temporal expressionFrom the preceding example, one can see that an obvious way to define these functions is by letting time_w_d return some minimal temporal value for temporal expressions in the conjuncts labelling a single arc, and time_window returns the maximum amongst these values.
In what follows, we will as an abuse of notation write time_window(A2) to denote the temporal expression returned by the function time_window in the above definition.
We now define the above concepts formally, in which we assume a monitor M on interpreting an ATN XN = ({S1, S2, S3},A1, A2) for the norm N = (N orm T ype,N orm Activation, N ormCond− ition,N orm Expiration, N ormT arget) Let a be an arc in A1 or A2, where a is labelled by: { (Ob β 1 , M β 1 , T β 1 ), . . ., (Ob β n , M β n , T β n )}DEFINITION 5.
[Interpreting N ormExpiration] Let N ormExpiration = γ 1 ∨ . . . ∨ γ l .
• We say that a monitor M on evaluates N ormExpiration as not holding if, for j = 1 . . . l, γ j does not not hold.
• If at least one arc a in A2 is satisfied, then XN transitions to S3, and:• If N is an obligation or permission, then N is said to be fulfilled.
• If N is a prohibition then N is said to be violated.
Let the obligation N be activated (X N is in node S2).
Suppose M on evaluates N ormExpiration as not holding.If time_window(A2) evaluates to true, and no arc in A2 is satisfied, then X N remains in node S2, and the obligation N is said to be violated.We have thus far illustrated monitoring with respect to the obligation N ormGoods in Example 1.
In the next section we describe an implementation of a monitor, and its validation under a realworld scenario that involves agents governed by permissions, prohibitions and obligations in the aerospace domain.
This section describes an implementation of a monitor that receives messages from observers, and processes them so as to transition the ATN representations of the norms being monitored.
At its core, our monitor contains a message store that is updated by received messages.
When an arc is satisfied (see Definition 4) with respect to the contents of a message store, the monitor transitions the ATN.
We consider two types of ATN: abstract and instantiated.
ATNs in state S1 are said to be abstract because their arcs are labelled by expressions whose variables will be instantiated by concrete situations in which the norm comes into force (is activated).
Hence, given an abstract ATN, when an arc a in A1 is satisfied, the resulting grounding of the variables in the M β s labelling a is propagated to the variables in expressions labelling arcs in A2, thus creating an instantiated instance I of the abstract ATN, where I is then transitioned to S2 (corresponding to activation of the norm).
For example, the norm in Example 1 has a variable denoting a generic type of good that, once accepted, needs to be paid for.
In this case, when the monitor receives a message denoting that a supplier Susan has the good galoshes in stock for buyer Bernard, the abstract ATN of Figure 2b is instantiated and its variables S, G and B are bound to Susan, galoshes and Bernard respectively.
From this point on, only observer messages whose contents satisfy these variable groundings can cause the instantiated ATN to be transitioned to state S3.Finally, when norms are fulfilled or violated, the monitor generates notifications to the manager to take appropriate action.
We illustrate this operation in Figure 3, which shows the flow of messages from the observers to the monitor's message queue, its processing and subsequent notifications to the manager.
Require: Message queue Q msg Require: Message store M St Require: Set of abstract norm ATNs X Abs Require: Set of instantiated norm ATNs X Inst 1: while Monitor is active do 2: while Q msg is not empty do 3:Retrieve M sg from head of Qmsg Add M sg to M St {First, deal with messages} for all Abstract norm ATN A in X Abs do for all Arcs a in A1 A do if satisf ied(M St ,arc label a) then for all Arcs a in A2 I do if satisf ied(M St ,arc label a) then remove I from X Inst move I to state S3 if Norm I is an obligation or permission then This process is more precisely illustrated in Algorithm 1, which describes the control loop used in our monitor.Its initial loop (lines 2 to 27) handles messages received from the observers by initially trying to satisfy outgoing arcs from S1 in the abstract ATNs (line 6).
If successful for at least one arc (line 7), then an instantiated ATN is created, added to the set of instantiated ATNs and transitioned to S2 (lines 8 to 10).
Satisfaction of outgoing arcs from S2 (i.e., arcs in A2) in each instantiated ATN is then checked (line 15), and if successful, the instantiated ATN is removed from the set of instantiated ATNs and transitioned to S3 (lines 17 to 18).
When this transition occurs and the norm is an obligation or a permission, it denotes that the norm has been fulfilled, else if the norm is a prohibition the norm has been violated, and the manager is notified accordingly (lines 19 to 22).
Finally, our algorithm needs to deal with the case where a time window has elapsed for obligations.
This occurs in the loop of lines 28 through 32.
If an instantiated obligation ATN is still in X Inst (none of its arcs in A2 are satisfied), and time_window (A2) evaluates to true, then the monitor notifies the manager that the obligation has been violated.
In order to validate our approach to monitoring, we implemented and deployed a monitor in a prototype multi-agent system in which agents exchange messages that correspond to obliged, prohibited and permitted behaviours encoded in an electronic contract.
Specifically, recent work on electronic representations and software tools for contracts [18] have highlighted a number of case studies [7].
A prototype for an aerospace logistics case study [16] implements aerospace agents -airline operators (AOs), engine manufacturers (EMs), and service sites (SSs) -whose behaviours are required to comply with (amongst others) norms governing the repair of engines and sourcing of parts for these repairs.
In particular, it is commonplace for EMs, located at airports, to be under obligation to have operational engines available for the planes of a client AO.
Furthermore, AOs may dictate permissions and prohibitions on the sourcing of parts for their engines.
These norms are then inherited in contracts between EMs and service sites responsible for the actual servicing and repair of engines.
For instance, in order for a given EM Boing to fulfill its obligations and provenance restrictions for a given AO, Boing's contract C with a service site Heathhedge stipulates the following norms:1.
Ob1: Heathhedge is obliged to repair engines for Boing within 7 days of receipt of an order for repair.
2.
Per1 and Per2: Heathhedge is permitted to source parts for engines for Boing, from part manufacturers 1 and 2 (pm1 and pm2).
3.
Pro3: Heathhedge is prohibited from sourcing parts for engines for Boing, from part manufacturer 3 (pm3).
The prototype implementation deploys AgentSpeak(L) agents [19] representing each of the contract parties Boing and Heathhedge, as well as the part manufacturers pm1, pm2 and pm3.
We also deploy observers, a manager, and a monitor.
The observers are responsible for relaying to the monitor, messages exchanged between Boing and Heathhedge, and between Heathhedge and the part manufacturers.
In what follows we describe two scenarios in which messages are observed and relayed to a monitor who then processes these together with ATNs representing the above norms, and reports on their status.
For both scenarios it is assumed that there is a prior message from Boing to Heathhedge ordering repair of an engine.
This message results in the ATNs for each of Ob1, Per1, Per2 and Pro3 being transitioned to their activation state S2.
1 Heathedge orders a part for the engine from pm1.
2 pm1 informs Heathedge that the delivery time for the part is 3 days.
3 The delivery time is acceptable for Heathedge since it will allow Heathedge to repair the engine within 7 days, and so Heathedge orders the part from pm1.
This order message results in the AT N for Per1 transitioning to S3, thus indicating fulfilment of the permission.4 However, Heathedge is notified by pm1 that the part has been sent on the 4th day after the part order from Heathedge (because of unavoidable delays).5 Because of the delay in receipt of the part, Heathhedge cannot repair the engine repair within 7 days and so no message informing completion of repair is sent from Heathhedge to Boing within the 7 day time window.
Hence the AT N for Ob1 is in state S2 on day 8, and the monitor informs the manager that Heathhedge has violated its obligation.
In Scenario 2, pm1 and pm2 inform Heathedge of delivery times that are not acceptable.
Heathedge is then faced with a choice of violating its obligation, or ordering from the prohibited pm3 who can provide the part in an acceptable time.
Heathhedge chooses the latter option.
Observation of the order message sent from Heathedge to pm3 results in transitioning the ATN for Pro3 to S3, and the monitor informs the manager of violation of this prohibition.
However, Heathhedge informs Boing of completion of repair on the sixth day after receipt of the repair order.
This results in the ATN for Ob1 transitioning to S3.
Hence, the obligation is reported by the monitor as fulfilled.
In this paper we have described a monitoring architecture in which trusted observers report to monitors on states of interest relevant to the activation, fulfillment, violation and expiration status of norms.
This provides some measure of assurance that sanctions will be applied as and when appropriate, and thus enhances prospects for deployment of agents in normative systems.
We have described how individual norms are represented as ATNs, that are processed by monitors together with observations relayed by observers, in order to determine the status of norms.
The ATNs represent complex behaviours and states of interest, and only behaviours specified by the norms are represented.
Hence, a given ATN can represent the same norm specified in any one of a number of multiagent systems.
Furthermore, ATN representations of norms are independent of each other, allowing run time addition and removal of norms to the monitored system.
Taken together, these features enhance the generality of the framework, and to substantiate this claim, we have described a proof of concept implementation of a monitor agent monitoring agents whose behaviours are governed by normative clauses in an electronic contract.The framework described in this paper extends a recent preliminary framework [4] in that it allows for monitoring of complex jointly realised behaviours, deploys trusted observers, and implements and validates processing ATN representations of norms.
Other work related to ours includes monitoring of contracts in a Web Services context [11,17], where the focus is on quality of service metrics rather than on the behaviours of agents.
Other researchers adopt an overhearing approach to monitoring in organisational contexts [13,10].
However, these works adopt overhearing in order to infer the mental states of the agents, where these states are domain-dependent and private to the agents.
By contrast, we adopt overhearing of messages exchanged and predicates, for the different purpose of evaluating the status of norms.We conclude with a discussion of three areas of future work to be pursued.
As mentioned in Section 2, further work needs to address representation and monitoring of maintenance obligations that do not explicitly refer to temporal conditions.
For example, consider an obligation to always drive on the left.
In practice, such a norm will be activated at a time T 1 when an individual starts to drive, and terminates at time T 2 when she ceases to drive.
One might then specify an explicit temporal window: ∀T, T 1 ≤ T ≤ T 2.
This would require extending the processing of an ATN to transition back and forth from S2 to S3.
At each time point T , if she is driving on the left, the ATN transitions to the fulfillment state S3, and then immediately transitions back to S2, so that if at the next time point she is not driving on the left, then she can be detected as having violated the obligation.
An alternative would be to create a new instantiation of the maintenance obligation at each time point T .
In this view, the fulfillment of an instance of the norm at T results in its expiration, and so a new instance is created at T + 1.
Providing explanations of norm violations is important if managers are to appropriately assign responsibility and apply sanctions.
Explanations can also help to evolve the normative specification of a system in order to prevent future violations.
Thus far, monitors provide limited explanation of violation and fulfilment, in terms of the labels of the arcs transitioned.
Future work will investigate generation of more comprehensive explanations.
This may require reference to representations of work-flow separate from that implicitly specified by norms.
This information may in turn be gleaned from observers.
For example, in the second scenario in the use case, access to all messages exchanged between Heathedge and the part manufacturers can be used to explain that in order to fulfill the repair obligation, the prohibition on sourcing parts from pm3 had to be violated, since pm1 and pm2's delivery times would not have allowed the obligation to be fulfilled.Finally, we note that the focus of this paper has been on corrective monitoring, whereby critical states are monitored for violation of norms.
Predictive monitoring requires representation and recognition of danger states, which are associated with agent behaviours that suggest that a norm may be in danger of violation.
Future work will address how such states may be identified empirically; for example by observing and analysing violation of norms at runtime and the intermediate states that are reached prior to violation.
These intermediate states can then be explicitly (as extra nodes) in the ATN representation of norms, so that during future run-time executions, observation of messages indicating transition to these states may signal preemptive action to avoid violation.
