BitTorrent communities, both public and private, are immensely popular in the Internet, with tens of millions of users simultaneously active at any given moment.
Public and private BitTorrent communities are managed in different ways-for instance, some private communities enforce sharing ratios, have strict rules for content management, have a certain level of community oversight, and maintain a strong sense of exclusiveness.
In this paper, we present the results of extensive measurements of more than half a million peers in five communities, ranging from highly popular and well-known public communities to elite private communities that can only be joined by invitation.
We observe that the performance experienced by downloaders in the private communities is by far superior to the performance in the public communities, and we observe significant differences in connectability, seeder/leecher ratio, and seeding duration.
Based on our results, we conjecture that when effective ratio enforcement mechanisms are in place, BitTorrent's tit-for-tat mechanism is hardly influential anymore.
Our multi-community, multi-swarm measurements are significantly broader and more extensive than any earlier measurement study on BitTorrent.
The software infrastructure that we have employed for our measurements is depicted in Fig. 1.
It consists of three main components: (1) A web feed parser which downloads newly published .
torrent metadata files based on subscriptions to the communities' web feeds.
Hence, as soon as a new piece of content is released, our software detects its presence; (2) An instrumented BitTorrent client which logs all the tracker communication and all the state-messages received from the peers it has connections with.
We inserted an instrumented client into swarms that we discovered via the web feed parser; (3) A peerping script which repeatedly contacts every peer discovered by our client.
The script connects to each peer every 20 seconds using BitTorrent's Peer Wire Protocol, performs the initial handshake, waits until it receives the bitfield message of the peer, and closes the connection.
The received message contains information about the part of the download that the peer has completed, and enables us to induce information about download performance, seeders lifetime, seeder/leecher ratio, and connectability.
Using our measurement infrastructure, we performed measurements of 508,269 peers in 444 swarms from September to December 2009 and collected over 20 million bitfields in total.
Ratio enforcement mechanisms coupled with unique member accounts are employed by private communities to increase the number of seeders and the seeding capacity, eventually aimed at reaching a higher download performance.
We therefore measured the characteristics that relate to this aim, namely: download performance, connectability, seeder/leecher ratio, seeding duration, and the fraction of data supplied by seeders.
We measured for each community the average download speed of each discovered peer, based on the first and last bitfield messages received from it.
Fig. 2 shows the CDF of the average speed per community, while Table II shows the mean, median, and maximum of the observed values.
Note the log-scale on the horizontal axis of the CDF.
The median download speed in the private ones is 3-5 times higher than in the public ones.
The difference in mean download speed is far more extreme, suggesting that a minority of peers in the private communities has an extremely high performance.
The CDF shows that at least 7% of the peers in the private communities had average speeds of 10 Mbps or higher, whereas in the public communities virtually no peers reached this average speed.
Moreover, the private community with the strictest ratio enforcement (PolishTracker) shows the highest speeds.In our earlier measurements [10], we observed that only 10% of the peers had a download speed above 520 kbps, with an average of 240 kbps.
In 2005, Guo et al. [5] measured an average download speed of 160 kbps in a 48-day trace of 1,500 torrents.
In 2006, Iosup et al. [6] measured a considerably higher average download speed of around 500 kbps for the top 2,000 torrents of The Pirate Bay.
In our current measurements, the average download speed was around 1 Mbps in the public communities, and 3.6-8.6 Mbps in the private communities.
As Table II shows, 10% of the peers in EZTV had a speed of more than 1.5 Mbps while 10% of the peers in TorrentLeech had a speed of more than 7 Mbps.
Furthermore, 36-40% of the peers in the public communities and as much as 64-72% of the peers in the private communities had a download speed above 520 kbps.
The average speeds in the currently measured public communities are 4 times higher than those measured in [2003][2004], while for all the peers we measured this is almost 6 times.
The average speed in PolishTracker is even 36 times higher than that in any community we measured in [2003][2004].
We can safely conclude that the performance has seen a significant increase over the last 5 years.
Mol et al. [9] show that under a given fraction of unconnectable peers (e.g., peers behind a NAT or firewall), there is an upper bound to the sharing ratio these peers can sustain as a group.
We would therefore expect lower fractions of unconnectable peers in private communities.
In order to investigate this effect, we measured the fraction of unconnectable peers in each of the five communities.
Fig. 3 depicts the average fraction of unconnectable peers in each community over time, where time is taken relative to the birth of the respective swarm.
Table II displays the overall average fraction 1 per community.
Clearly, the gap between the public communities and the private communities is considerable.
At the extremes, public community EZTV has 47% unconnectable peers on average while elite community PolishTracker has only 20% unconnectable peers on average.In our earlier measurements of 2003-2004 [10], we observed around 40% unconnectable peers, which is in line with the current overall average of 39.3%.
However, the overall fractions of unconnectable peers in our measurements are lower than those reported in other work.
Measurements of [9] show 66% unconnectable peers for the public community Pirate Bay, and 45% for the private community TVTorrents.
Xie at al. [15] report 70% unconnectable peers for the public CoolStreaming system.
The seeder/leecher ratio indicates the number of seeders per leecher, and therefore gives an idea of supply vs. demand in swarms.
Fig. 4 shows observations of the seeder/leecher ratio in swarms in each of the communities.
Table II gives the overall average ratio 2 per community.
In TVTorrents, there are on average more than 100 seeders per leecher, with a peak observation of 1589.
PolishTracker has 64 seeders per leecher, with a peak observation of 667.
In such 'overseeded' swarms, it is likely that piece requests from an arriving leecher are almost immediately granted by seeders, and that the leecher can therefore saturate its download capacity quickly.
Moreover, during our measurements none of the swarms in PolishTracker was ever observed to drop below a ratio of 1.
The public communities, however, have considerably lower seeder/leecher ratios.
On average, the public communities had only 2-7 seeders per leecher.
Even at peak observations, The Pirate Bay had 32 seeders per leechers and EZTV had 46 seeders per leecher, which does not even come close to the peak ratios of the private communities.
In fact, in The Pirate Bay, as much as 47% of our observations were ratios below 1.2 This is again the overall average of the per-swarm averages.
As the BitTorrent protocol offers no direct incentive for seeding, communities have to rely either on altruism or on some additional incentive mechanism; the reciprocal capacity provided by leechers themselves with BitTorrent's titfor-tat protocol works reasonably well during flashcrowds, but is insufficient for sustainable performance.
The private communities in our selection therefore use credits or ratio enforcement to force their members to seed.
Fig. 5 and Table II show the CDF and several statistics of the seeding duration per community.
Again, note the logscale on the horizontal axis of the CDF.
In public community The Pirate Bay, 20% of the peers do not seed at all, 44% of the peers seed for less than one hour, and only 13% of the peers seed more 1 day.
EZTV has slightly higher seeding durations, with 20% of the peers seeding more than 1 day.
These measured seeding durations are significantly longer than those that we measured during our experiments in 2003-2004 [10], where 83% of 53,883 measured peers were seeding for less than one hour.
In the measurements of Guo et al. [5] in 2005, only 8% of the peers were seeding longer than 1 day.However, the currently measured seeding durations in the public communities are still significantly lower than those in the private communities, where more than 43% of the peers are seeding longer than 1 day and even 6-9% of the peers are seeding longer than 1 week.
Most extreme is PolishTracker, where only 2% of the peers do not seed at all and the majority of the peers seed for at least 20 hours.The difference in seeding duration between the three private communities is very small, which is interesting since their policies enforce quite different minimum seeding times and ratios (see Table I).
Apparently, it is most of all important that there is a ratio enforcement mechanism in place; the precise rules matter less.
Consequently, the differences in download speeds observed in Section IV-A have to be due to different numbers of seeders, and/or different upload/download capacities.
The seeder/leecher ratio results partly confirm this.
In BitTorrent, leechers and seeders have different upload policies [3].
Leechers prefer to upload to peers that reciprocate via the tit-for-tat mechanism, while seeders partly upload to the fastest downloaders and partly perform a round-robin selection over all interested peers.
A high fraction of data supplied by seeders therefore indicates a very low contribution of tit-for-tat to the download.
Fig. 6 shows the fraction of data supplied by seeders (since swarm birth) for both EZTV (representing the public communities) and TVTorrents (representing the private communities).
The results for TVTorrents show that after about 2 hours, virtually all of the data comes from seeders.
Apparently, tit-for-tat is almost irrelevant in such communities.
This is not so surprising, given the high seeder/leecher ratios and the high seeding durations demonstrated in Sections IV-C and IV-D.
Hence, private communities are in essence more similar to systems based on direct FTP transfers than to swarming systems where downloaders also upload.
This is a very important observation, since a lot of research into BitTorrent focuses on the tit-for-tat mechanism and its direct reciprocity.
Many subtle optimizations and variations on this protocol are suggested (e.g., [8], [14]), but apparently such optimizations will have very limited influence when community policies such as ratio enforcement dominate users' behavior.
Important early measurement studies on P2P networks are of Saroiu et al. [12], who measure and analyze Gnutella and Napster, and of Gummadi et al. [4], who focus on Kazaa.
Well-known early measurement studies of the BitTorrent protocol are by Izal et al. [7] on the evolution of a torrent; by Pouwelse et al. [10] on availability, integrity, flashcrowds, and performance; and by Guo et al. [5] on torrent popularity, torrent life-span, and multi-torrent participation.
The work of Andrade et al. [1] presents measurement results of three communities, focusing on file popularity, supply, and demand.
They find that torrent popularity distributions are non-heavy-tailed, that a small set of users contributes most of the resources, and that users that provide more resources are also those that demand more from it.
More recent work is presented by Stutzbach et al. [13] on churn, Rasti et al.[11] on performance, and Mol et al. [9] on firewalls.
In this paper, we have presented extensive measurements of over half a million peers in two public and three private BitTorrent communities.
Our most important findings are that: (1) the download speeds in private communities are 3-5 times higher than in public communities; (2) the observed average download speeds are at least 4 times as high as those observed in 2003-2004; (3) around 47-48% of the peers in public communities are unconnectable, whereas in private communities this is only 20-34%; (4) the seeder/leecher ratios in private communities are at least 10 times as large as those in public communities; (5) peers seed for a significantly longer duration in private communities, with more than 43% of the peers seeding longer than 1 day; (6) in private communities, almost all data is supplied by seeders, therefore rendering the contribution and importance of BitTorrent's tit-for-tat mechanism virtually irrelevant.
