The Help America Vote Act mandated that all polling places have an accessible method of voting that provides privacy and independence.
Direct Recording Electronic voting machines (DREs) have been assumed to be the solution to providing accessible voting, but there is reason to believe extant systems do not adequately serve this goal (Runyan, 2007).
This survey builds upon previous work with the visually disabled population and provides the opinions and recommendations of 202 legally blind voters.
Topics addressed include obstacles at the polling place, multiple modality systems, voting confidence, and input devices.
Data-based recommendations for auditory modes of voting systems include adjustable speed and volume, using male text-to-speech synthesized voices, and allowing for flexible navigation and the ability to skip through sections of text.
The process of voting is a complex task that includes the logistics of getting to and from a polling place, queuing and signing in to vote, social interactions with poll workers, reading and comprehending instructions on how to use a machine or ballot, completing a ballot to correctly reflect voter intention, reviewing the ballot for any errors, and casting the vote in a way to ensure that it is counted.
This can prove challenging for any member of the population, but for some individuals having a disability can serve to complicate the process.
This is especially true when election administrators and voting equipment designers do not have a complete understanding of the processes someone with this disability must go through in order to vote.
The purpose of this study is to detail the responses gathered by a comprehensive survey given to visually impaired voters, and further examine issues brought up by Piner and Byrne (in press).
A substantial portion of the voting population is visually impaired.
According to the U.S. Census Bureau Americans with Disabilities report (2005), 19% of the US population lives with one or more disabilities.
1.3 million persons (0.5%) reported legal blindness.
A fifth of Americans with disabilities (more than eight million people) have been unable to vote in presidential or congressional elections due to barriers at or getting to the polls (National Organization on Disability, 2004).
The Help America Vote Act (HAVA) of 2002 was the federal government's response to this situation, and mandated that all polling places have an accessible method of voting available for those wishing to vote in federal elections privately and independently.
For legally blind voters, a DRE (direct recording electronic) voting machine that utilizes an audio interface has a lot of potential that needs to be explored.
Previous work by Piner and Byrne (2010) addressed problems voters faced during the process of casting a ballot.
The mock election showed that visually impaired voters took significantly longer than sighted voters (31 minutes compared to 5 minutes) to complete an identical ballot.
Both groups had similar error rates (roughly 2%) and similar high ratings of satisfaction with the voting method used.This paper is a follow-up to the survey completed by Piner and Byrne (in press) and provides additional analyses that address what people say they dislike about current voting technology as well as what obstacles affect their voting experience.
An audio interface allows the highest level of accessibility across individuals with some form of visual impairment.
An audio-only interface certainly disenfranchises voters with co-occurring visual and hearing impairments.
But unlike instructions and interactions relayed in Braille, audio requires no specialized skills.
This survey focused primarily on an audio-based system of interaction.
As well as interacting with an audio DRE, voters receive instructions and assistance from poll workers.
Poll workers go through little, if any, training and their experience tends to be with the many administrative tasks surrounding an election rather than the ever changing and sometimes technically challenging interfaces of the voting systems themselves.
This necessitates an interface that is essentially "walk up and use" by the voter.Understanding the voting process and how to better advocate for equal rights for the visually impaired is a topic that has received a lot of attention from the NFB (National Federation of the Blind), the country's largest membership organization of blind people (NFB, n.d.).
Elections give people opportunities to voice their opinions about elected officials and legislation relating to disability benefits, employment equality, health benefits for visually impaired individuals, and many more highly relevant issues for visually impaired citizens.
Research performed by the NFB's Jernigan Institute used a phone-based survey of blind voters and asked about their experiences in the 2008 presidential election (Hollander Cohen & McBride Marketing Research, 2008).
Many of the specific questions asked to the voters in the NFB study complement the more general preferences and opinions that are detailed by Piner and Byrne (in press).
Additionally, comparisons between the general and sighted populations' use of voting technologies are considered.Results from this survey will inform upcoming research and directly impact how the input devices and user response or interactions are designed in a future accessible DRE.
Using the mock election results from Vote-PAD, a non-computerized technology, as a baseline, a direct comparison between the usability of different accessible technologies can be obtained (Piner & Byrne, 2010).
There will be an emphasis in future studies on utilizing the survey responses in order to make informed decisions during the design process, ultimately with the goal of devising a multi-modality accessible interface that out-performs currently available systems.
Subjects were recruited and interviewed both in person and online.
Twenty-two individuals were recruited in person at the National Federation of the Blind's Texas state convention, and were compensated with $15 for their participation.
One hundred and eighty people were recruited online through Internet correspondence sent to email lists, blogs, and message boards that serve the visually impaired community, in order to reach a larger portion of this population.
Subjects completing the survey online were given a chance to express their thoughts and opinions, but were not compensated monetarily for their time.The total two hundred and two subjects (112 female, 76 male) ranged in age from 19-86, with a mean age of 50.42 (SD=13.5).
Table 1 shows the frequency of the subjects' education levels; nine subjects did not report their level of education.
Table 2 shows the frequency of the subjects' ethnicity; 11 subjects did not report their ethnicity.
The subjects' previous voting experience and number of elections voted is shown in Table 3.
Only 5 subjects had never voted in any type of election.
All subjects reported being legally blind.
"Legally blind" is defined as having "central visual acuity of 20/200 or less in the better eye with the use of a correcting lens" and/or having "the widest diameter of the visual field subtend an angle no greater than 20 degrees" (National Federation of the Blind, 1986).
This is a fairly broad definition that encompasses many levels of impairment.
The low vision respondents are individuals who retain residual vision that allows them to read larger point text or regular text with the assistance of a magnifying glass.
The light perception respondents are individuals who are able to tell light from dark and the general direction of the light source.
And the no vision respondents are individuals with no vision or light perception.
Table 4 displays the breakdown of respondents by magnitude of vision loss.
All materials were read to the subjects who were interviewed in person.
The respondent was seated across from the experimenter, with a microphone in the middle to record their answers.
Subjects were first given a consent form and agreed that they were both over the age of 18 and considered legally blind.
Following that, they received 50 questions including demographic questions, questions related to their previous voting experiences and questions about desired changes and future directions for the voting industry (see Appendix for the complete survey).
Question formats included multiple choice, openended, and 5 or 10-point Likert scale questions.
Subjects were given as much time as desired to respond.
After completing the survey, they were debriefed regarding the nature of the experiment and given contact information if they desired to follow up on anything with the experimenters.Subjects who completed the survey online read the materials themselves by any method they chose, such as increasing the font size, a screen reader, having a friend read it to them, etc.
Those who received the survey online were given a link to SurveyGizmo, a survey tool that collected and reported their answers.
Whenever applicable, an "other" option along with the direction to "please specify" and a text box were provided in an attempt to account for a wide range of experiences and preferences.
The results of some of the general response questions are summarized in Table 5.
• Eleven percent of respondents report never having used Braille and 40% report being completely proficient Braille readers.
If a Braille interface were offered, only 34.4% would choose to use Braille over an audio interface.
• When reporting computer skill (on a 10-point Likert scale with 1 being a novice and 10 being an expert) no one reported being lower than a 3 (2.2%) and 7.8% reported to be experts.
The majority of respondents were experienced computer users, ranging between 7-9 (55%).
78.9% of respondents use a computer more than 20 hours a week.
Older respondents tended to be less skilled and use computer less frequently than younger respondents.
There were significant negative correlations between age and both computer skill (r (158) = -.20, p = .01) and usage (r (156) = -.20, p = .02).
• When asked about using an automated teller machine (ATM) to get money or complete a transaction, 23.9% of respondents never use one, 28.0% use one occasionally (several times a year), and 39.4% use one often (at least once a month).
Several of the survey questions used were taken from previous voting research done with a sighted population.
This allows for a direct comparison between the populations to see if what ways, if any, they differ (Everett, et al., 2008).
The similarities between the study populations of both blind and sighted individuals can be seen in Table 6.
The only significant difference between the two groups is the level of self-reported computer expertise, with visually impaired subjects rating themselves as more competent than did the sighted subjects (χ 2 (9, N = 308) = 41.08, p < .001, Cramer's V = .37).
During an election, 31.2% of respondents reported they worried about figuring out how to use the technology to cast their vote and 22.6% felt that time pressure caused them to rush or make a mistake.
Only 16.3% of respondents reported they never review their completed ballot before casting it and 38.8% always review their ballot.
Over half of the respondents (58%) indicated that having a way of directly verifying that their ballot accurately represented how they intended to vote was an essential part of any voting system.Only one respondent felt that the ability to review the ballot was unimportant, There was a slight preference overall among respondents for a voting machine's audio to use a recorded human voice rather than a synthesized textto-speech program (Piner & Byrne, in press).
There was a significant difference in preference between levels of vision (χ 2 (2, N = 152) = 7.05, p = .03), see Figure 1.
The effect size, as measured by Cramer's V, was .215.
A follow-up test between the no vision and light perception groups found no significant preference for either type of audio (χ 2 (1, N = 108) = 1.26, p = .
26).
Among low vision respondents, there was a significant preference for recorded human voices (χ2 (1, N = 44) = 7.36, p = .01).
Piner and Byrne (in press) found that most respondents were familiar and comfortable with using and understanding synthesized voices.
Most had no preference regarding the gender of the audio voice, but among those with a preference male voices were significantly more preferable (χ 2 (1, N = 63) = 26.68, p < .001).
There was no significant difference in desired audio gender based on the respondent's own gender, χ 2 (1, N = 58) = 1.73, p = .19.
Comfort varied significantly across level of vision (χ 2 (16, N = 158) = 31.96, p = .01, Cramer's V = .32), with no vision users being more comfortable than low vision users (χ 2 (8, N = 137) = 24.28, p = .002, Cramer's V = .42).
The ability for the user to be able to change audio volume and speed were both highly desired aspects of a computerized audio interface, followed by the ability to change pitch and language to a less extent ( Figure 2).
Figure 2.
Percentage of visually impaired voters who would like to be able to adjust the given setting on an audio interface.
Some voting machines offer multiple modalities to help accommodate the large diversity present in the voting public.
If provided, 16.4% of respondents would like to use a visual and audio mode simultaneously.If it were available, 34.4% of respondents would prefer to use a Braille interface instead of an audio interface.
A significant relationship between a respondent's Braille ability and their desire to use the Braille interface was found (and as expected, better Braille readers responded that they would prefer a Braille interface more often), r (151) = .55, p < .001.
There is also an influence of individual preference beyond just the ability to read Braille.
Out of the 64 total respondents who reported completely proficiency with reading Braille (a 10 on a 10-point Likert scale), over a third (37.5%) still would prefer to use an audio interface.
There was no significant preference between a Braille interface and an audio interface, χ2 (1, N = 63) = 3.57, p = .59 among Braille readers.
Respondents were asked to think about how comfortable they would be with using different methods to control their interactions with a voting machine.
Piner and Byrne (in press) found that a large majority of respondents would feel comfortable using directional arrows or a telephone keypad to interact with a voting machine.
Table 7 shows the types of input devices used by respondents to interact with their computers on a daily basis.
Subjects surveyed in person were asked two questions concerning a proposed input device, the button box, which they had the opportunity to feel and explore tactilely (see Figure 3).
85% of respondents (17 out of the 20) said that they felt the six different buttons on the button box were easy to discriminate and tell which one performed which function.
1 respondent felt this task was difficult, and the final 2 respondents rated the level of difficulty as average.
A large majority of respondents (75%, or 15 out of 20) felt the button size was fine.
4 respondents would have preferred to have smaller buttons, and 1 respondent would have preferred to have larger buttons.
Figure 3.
Large, tactile button box proposed as a possible DRE input method in future mock election studies.
Straight-party voting is the practice of voting for candidates of the same political party for multiple offices.
In some states, there is a single option on the ballot that allows a voter to cast a vote for a selected political party for every partisan race.
A total of 16 states presently offer some form of straight-party voting on the ballot.
Piner and Byrne (in press) found that most respondents have received assistance with voting at some point.
While Piner and Byrne (in press) found that a large majority of voters trusted the poll workers to provide them with accurate information, nearly a quarter of respondents said that poll worker attitude was an obstacle that they felt make it difficult for them to vote.
This was exacerbated when the respondent had previously been assisted by a poll worker and these individuals were significantly more likely to mention that poll worker attitude was a problem, χ 2 (1, N = 166) = 5.04, p = .03, Cramer's V = .17.
Multiple obstacles at or getting to the polls exist for blind voters beyond the attitude of poll workers, although that was the most mentioned barrier.
Table 11 categorizes the most frequent responses.
Over twothirds of respondents (67.3%) reported they faced one or more obstacle.
One focus of this study is to observe how blind voters differ, if at all, from the sighted population.
This comparison could potentially guide the direction of changes that need to be made when implementing truly accessible voting systems for the entire population.
As can be seen in Table 6, the age range and gender division of the two subjects pools is very similar.
Blind users did self rate themselves higher in computer expertise.
This is in part due to the majority of the survey responses from blind voters being collected on the computer using an online polling site.
To be able to respond to the survey in the first place required a large amount of computer knowledge and comfort with using accessible technologies (like a screen reader).
Beyond this limited context, visually impaired individuals also need to use computer systems in many daily tasks in order to interact with the visual world.
Both these factors explain why computer expertise is the only significant difference between the sighted and blind subjects.
In the mock election, only voting time differed between blind and sighted voters, with error rates and satisfaction scores remaining consistent (Piner & Byrne, 2010).
In the survey, both groups of users were equally as likely to be confronted and unsure about certain obstacles in the polling place (Piner & Byrne, in press).
To review a ballot a sighted voter only needs to look at the paper or computer screen and verify that how they intended to vote is the same as the answer that is marked on their ballot.
Visually impaired voters must often take someone's or something's word that their ballot represents their intentions, as there are very few ways for them to directly verify what is on the paper.Paper-based non-computerized systems like VotePAD utilize a tactile feedback mechanism in the form of the light-sensing wand to allow voters to verify their marks (Piner & Byrne, 2010).
All but one survey respondent felt that some method of ballot review was an important aspect to include in a voting system.
However, only a little over a third (38.8%) of blind voters reported that they always review their ballot.Ballot review needs to be an available option, for times when a voter is uncertain or needs to double check a race.
In other situations, a long and tedious review process can actually become a hindrance.
A new DRE design should aim to strike a balance between the two, with a review process available when needed but not a prerequisite for casting the ballot.
The use of an audio interface either by itself or conjunction with another modality (such as a visual or refreshable Braille display) is fundamental to providing an accessible DRE interface.
Allowing multiple options to be tailored by voters to suit their own needs is critical.
Most of the survey respondents have experience with screen readers (pieces of software that are used to convert computer and web content into audio navigation).
Experienced users set the speech rate upwards of 300 words per minute, a speed far faster than an inexperienced listener could comprehend (WebAIM, n.d.).
DRE interfaces should allow voters to capitalize on this expertise, as it is not unusual for auditory interfaces to have extremely steep time costs relative to visual interfaces (e.g., Piner & Byrne, 2010).
Braille interfaces have been discussed as a viable alternative for blind voters.
Braille provides visually impaired individuals with a special system designed exclusively to allow them to read and interact with the world.
But when designing a voting system, the number Etya'ale D, et al., 2004).
Out of the 64 Braille readers among Piner and Byrne's (in press) survey respondents, over a third would still prefer to use an audio interface rather than a Braille interface.
The question of the "best" modality is not just a matter of ability, but also of preference.
This underlines the need to offer options so that people can tailor the voting experience to their unique needs.
Designers should not make assumptions about what works best for an entire group of diverse individuals.
One possible solution would be to combine elements of Braille into an existing interface, such as Braille button labels.
These would appeal to and enhance the experience of even novice Braille readers, while not distracting from the overall interface or being a necessary part of being able to vote.
The magnitude of someone's vision loss directly impacts the type of technology they come into contact with on a daily basis.
Low vision users may be adept at utilizing their own magnifying tools to make regular print, computer screens, and publicly accessible terminals (like ATMs or airport check-in kiosks) accessible to them.
Users with no vision may be comfortable with listening to text-to-speech computerized voices like those that are used in screen readers and be able to listen to them at a rapid pace that would be unintelligible to those with no experience with speeded up audio.
Furthermore, respondents with no vision rated themselves as significantly more comfortable with listening to and understanding synthesized audio.
Out of 112 no vision or light perception respondents, only 4 people (3.6%) rated themselves at a 5 or less on a 10 point scale, indicating relatively little exposure and comfort with using this type of audio.
On the other hand, 8 out of 46 low vision respondents (17.4%) rated themselves a 5 or less.
This division between technologies can also be seen in the preferences for type of DRE audio, with low vision users preferring a human voice, and no vision users showing no preference between human or synthesized voices.
With almost two-thirds of the blind population choosing to vote in person, it is essential that accessible voting machines that allow people to cast a secret ballot be provided.
This is one of many obstacles to overcome at the polls.
The most evident in the openended survey results was the interaction between the voters and the poll workers (Piner & Byrne, in press).
The expressed problems included a desire for more training of the poll workers on how to use the technology, how to assist people with disabilities, and a general acceptance of accessible technology.
Accessible voting options (like large print, audio, or even Braille interfaces) need to be integrated with all voting machines so the process is no different from a poll worker's perspective.
Alternatively, machine manufacturers should endeavor to provide a simple setup that poll workers with limited technological experience can successfully complete.
In general, the NFB Survey (Hollander Cohen & McBride Marketing Research, 2008) found that the instructions given to voters regarding the use of the voting machines were adequate, especially since most audio interfaces also have built-in systems of help and instructions.
84% of voters in the 2008 election said they were provided with clear instructions on how to use the voting machine or didn't need them at all.
Out of those who did receive instructions, 92% felt these instructions were just right rather than too complicated or too simplistic.
This corresponds to poll workers level of comfort.
The Citizens Union Foundation reported that 77.3% of poll workers felt knowledgeable about demonstrating how to use a voting machine.
This was also a task that most poll workers (70.6%) performed at some point on election day.Poll workers volunteer for the position and are usually paid close to minimum wage.
Training of poll workers varies between districts.
Some poll workers receive comprehensive training courses whereas some poll workers receive no training at all.
For example, the state of Texas offers an online training course (from http://www.texaspollworkertraining.com/) that can be distributed to poll workers.
The course does provide guidelines for "Assisting Voters with Disabilities," including mobility, hearing, and visual disabilities.There is one page of guidelines for ensuring accessibility for people with visual impairment.
The process of checking in, escorting the voter to and from their voting station, and the treatment of service animals are all covered, but the program completely fails to address any part of the actual means of casting a ballot (Figure 4) Only 5.7% of the poll workers surveyed did not have any training before election day.
About half (56.6%) of those who did attend training were introduced to an actual voting machine during that training and 45% recommended that they train on a voting machine during the class.
When asked about their level of comfort performing certain tasks, only a third of poll workers (32.9%) said they would feel comfortable setting up a machine without assistance.
The Citizens Union Foundation had several suggestions in line with the need for more practical training for the New York Board of Elections.
These included encouraging "hands-on" demonstrations of the voting machines and mandatory training for all poll workers regardless of past experience.Training issues are relevant because many DRE systems used today need to be rebooted and go through a set up process in order to put them into an accessible, audio mode.
This level of technical familiarity would require a poll worker with the knowledge of how to set up a machine and could be gained through a training program on the actual election equipment.
If an accessible machine was not available, respondents in the NFB's Survey (Hollander Cohen & McBride Marketing Research 2008) had to spend an average of 15 minutes waiting for poll workers to set up the machine.
Perceived negative treatment by poll workers was partially dependent on whether or not a voter was provided with an accessible machine.
Having the machines available and poll workers with the technical knowledge of how to set them up is essential to cutting down wait and voting times, and increasing voter satisfaction.
As was demonstrated in Piner and Byrne (2010) there is a substantial time difference between sighted and visually impaired populations' voting times.
This adds an extra incentive for blind voters to take advantage of both early voting and straight party voting.
In early voting, individuals can arrive when it is convenient for them.
This freedom of day and time may help alleviate their reliance on others, an obstacle mentioned by 10.6% of respondents.Straight party voting provides a one-question solution to vote on the majority of the ballot (excluding nonpartisan races and propositions).
A time benefit for straight party voting was not seen among the general population but it might be relevant among a population that takes five times longer to vote (Campbell & Byrne, 2009).
The improvement would also depend on how people choose to straight party vote; either by using the single ballot option (giving them a large time benefit if they were able to skip or skim through the alreadyvoted races without reviewing them) or by voting in each race individually (which would most likely result in a similar voting time to voters who chose candidates of varying parties).
A consistent order of parties on the ballot such as the Republican candidate always being listed first, Democratic candidate second, and Libertarian candidate third (as was the case with the ballot used by Piner & Byrne (2010)) may be highly beneficial to voters utilizing only the audio interface.
These regular landmarks cold be used as an indicator of how far into a race one is, and used by voters to orient themselves on the ballot.
The relationship between a respondent's computer skills and their level of comfort with using directional arrow keys can be understood in terms of the keyboard, the preferred input device by a majority of users.
Arrows keys are an integral part of navigation a webpage or document using a screen reader.
This level of familiarity and comfort could be taken advantage of and designed into a voting machine's input device.
Future research should include a comparison between a familiar input device (like a telephone keypad or computer keyboard) and one designed specifically for the needs of a voting system (such as the proposed button box mentioned in the survey).
In conclusion, our results suggest certain guidelines be followed based on the data collected in this survey and often supported by outside sources.
Five proposed guidelines are listed here, based both on an analysis of response data as well as the ideas and thoughts presented by voters via the open-ended portions of the survey.
These guidelines are designed to be flexible enough to be applied across devices, regardless of any specific details relating to input devices, screen size, audio equipment, etc.First, an accessible DRE interface should include an audio mode that can be used in conjunction with the standard visual display.
Currently, only a small number of respondents use both interfaces, but this would increase if users could change aspects of the display.
This relates to the next guideline that a system should provide the ability to adjust audio speed and volume as well as text size and contrast.
The third guidelines is in regards to audio and suggests that a male synthesized text-to-speech voice that can be sped up without distortion should be used.
This was chosen over the slightly preferred human voice due to the high desired ability to speed up the audio (requested by more than 90% of respondents).
Fourth, navigation should allow users to skip through sections of speech that are not important to them as well as allowing them to replay any parts they may have missed or not comprehended the first time.
Finally, a way of reviewing the ballot must be included but should not be required to end the voting process.By combining these unique perspectives with a solid understanding of human factors best practices, a voting system that is both accessible and useable can be designed.
The integration of accessibility into mainstream technology often has benefits beyond allowing more of the population access to a system.
As Vanderheiden (1990) points out, "When products, environments or systems are made more accessible to persons with limitations, they are usually easier for more able-bodied persons to use.
Some of the potential benefits include lower fatigue, increased speed and lower error rates."
Use of these guidelines to improve multi-modality audio and visual systems may improve the voting experience beyond visual impairments and impact individuals with other factors like aging, cognitive impairments or language-based disorders.
This research was supported by the National Science Foundation under grant #CNS-0524211 (the ACCURATE center).
The views and conclusions contained herein are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing the official policies or endorsements, either expressed or implied, of the NSF, the U.S. Government, or any other organization.
We would also like to thank the National Federation of the Blind for their participation as well as the many individuals who took the time to publicize and complete the online survey.
x
