Consumer communications and entertainment services, including broadcast TV and VoIP, require service providers to meet stringent availability and latency constraints.
When a packet technology, such as IP, is used to transport these services, this also poses stringent packet loss requirement on the network.
This aspect of IPTV, where impairments have consumer-visible impact and potential public relations consequences, creates new challenges in protocol design, as well as network management.
The key to operating an effective network is to expand to a more comprehensive network management approach to be able to better anticipate and manage potential network problems.
This paper describes network management techniques deployed in a production IPTV network with over 2 million customers.
Multiple service providers have deployed IPTV for distribution of both live TV (so-called "linear" TV) as well as on-demand delivery of video content.
Unlike an Internet Service Provider (ISP) who provides residential broadband Internet service on a best-effort basis, it is critical for an IPTV service provider to ensure high quality of the service.
Quality has two key aspects: providing sufficient network availability to ensure that the impact on video perception resulting from end-to-end packet loss is tolerable for the viewer and delay (latency) experienced by a user viewing the TV content is properly managed.
For example, the higher layer mechanisms (FEC, retransmission based recovery of lost packets) can handle, with reasonable delays, burst losses of relatively small magnitudes (roughly less than 50 milliseconds).
This, in turn, becomes the objective of the restoration time for the lower network layers to recover from link failures.Many of the issues of running and managing the IPTV network end-to-end (i.e., from the national video source to the user set-top box) are similar to what an ISP applies to other loss/delay-sensitive services.
However, the especially high sensitivity of the IPTV application to impairments creates new network management challenges.
This application has motivated us to investigate and implement a more comprehensive approach than traditional network management systems, including more careful multi-layer protocol design and anticipatory network management.IPTV networks with a large customer base are primarily in South Korea and in Europe, especially France, Germany, Spain, and Italy, but they span a relatively small geographical area.
In this paper we discuss the philosophy, protocol design, network management techniques, and tools we use in one of the largest commercial IP networks, spanning the continental United States that provides residential TV services (IPTV using IP multicast), Voiceover-IP (VoIP), and broadband Internet services.To understand our approach for IPTV network management, one must first understand the complexity of implementing IPTV.
Because of the requirement for high reliability for the IPTV service, the most critical of these challenges is to model the potential occurrence of multiple, concurrent outages.
Very few (if any) network management systems anticipate and plan for multiple outages.
This constitutes one of the major anticipatory aspects of our network management challenge.
Note that network outages occur from two major sources: 1) network component failures or fiber cuts and 2) planned network maintenance or reconfiguration activity.
In the few hours that it often takes to rectify an outage, there is a small (but not negligible) probability of additional component failures.
In fact, many multiple outages occur because a failure (type 1) occurs while a maintenance activity (type 2) is underway.
E.g., analysis of link outages from our IPTV deployment over a four month period reveals that in 17% of cases, at least 2 links were down concurrently, and in 2% of the cases, 3 or more links were down concurrently.
In addition, for IPTV services to compete cost-effectively with more traditional broadcast technologies, such as cable TV, its implementation usually employs IP multicast [4] for distribution of broadcast TV.
Multicast results in a efficient (low capacity/low cost) network, but one that requires very careful multi-layer restoration planning, design, and management.
Link-based Fast Reroute (FRR) [6] is used to restore router link outages within 50 milliseconds and, therefore, is usually transparent to the higher layers.
Because FRR is considered to be automatic "self-healing", typical operators are unaware of the actual state of the network.
However FRR reroutes traffic over a path of alternate routers and links, which has a significant impact on the network.
As described in section 2.1, a subsequent outage creates a potential for path overlap and hence congestion.We use three major approaches that involve anticipation of potential network events.
1) We model the potential for multiple outages -in particular potential FRR backup paths, multicast tree changes, and monitoring link congestion and load balancing.
2) We coordinate planned network maintenance activity with network state.
This approach has significantly improved network performance.
It has preventedsituations by avoiding maintenance activities that would have otherwise affected an active FRR backup path.
3) By maintaining a detailed and visual history of all network topology states, our approach can analyze past network states and outage patterns and therefore make appropriate topology changes or equipment repairs/upgrades.
We have approached this problem by integrating multiple network data sources that gives us a comprehensive view across many different layers.
These data sources are combined to provide a simple and clear visualization of the network in a tool called Birdseye.
The tool visualizes the USA backbone network, the status of its links (down, planned maintenance, up, in FRR backup mode), its multicast tree, and link congestion.
This alerts the network manager about the complete routing and performance of the underlying network.
The Birdseye visualization tool is deployed in the AT&T Network Operation Center and is actively used by network operators to monitor and perform proactive network management for the U-verse backbone network.Next, we describe the network and the restoration protocol used.
We describe the various data sources for Birdseye in the Section 3.
Finally, in Section 4, we describe several network states to illustrate the operations of Birdseye and how it alerts operators.
AT&T's IPTV network distributes video, internet, and VoIP to over two million customers in the continental US (as of Jan 2010).
Figure 1 (copied from [3]) gives a simplified view of the network architecture.
The backbone, consists of a super hub office (SHO) and a large number of Video Hub Offices (VHOs), one at each metro.
Video content is gathered from the national content providers at the SHO and is distributed to VHOs using PIM-SSM [1].
An Internal Gateway Protocol (IGP) such as OSPF [5] distributes topology and routing changes.
Each VHO in turn feeds its metropolitan area.
Our focus in this paper is on the backbone portion of the network.
The metro network, broadband Internet, and VoIP services, are beyond the scope of this paper (see [3].)
Figure 2 (as shown in [9]) is an example of how the network interfaces are set up to be able to quickly recover from failures.
Each rectangular box represents a router at a VHO with the 'root' being the SHO.
Figure 2 shows the network operation when there is no failure.
Focusing on router pairs E and C, we observe four Internal Gateway OSPF adjacencies between this router pair: two unidirectional (or directed) pseudowires (dashed lines between nodes E and C) and two unidirectional physicallayer "PHY" links (solid lines between nodes E and C).
These pseudowires are associated with a primary path and a corresponding backup path (which are typically MPLS label switched paths (LSPs)).
The primary path for each pseudowire is its corresponding PHY link and the backup path routes over other PHY links that are disjoint from the primary path.
The OSPF link costs (which we generically refer to as weights) on the pseudowire links are lower than those for the PHY links.
This causes the OSPF shortest path algorithm to primarily route over the pseudowire links rather than the PHY links in a non-failure state.
By routing over the pseudowire links, the protocol enables that OSPF shortest paths and PIM multicast tree to be unaffected as long as the pseudowire remains up.
Figure 3 illustrates the case of a successful FRR restoration, where both of the PHY links between E and C (i.e., both directions are impacted) fail.
Upon this failure being detected, both PHY links are taken out of service and the two pseudowires are switched from their primary path to their backup paths.
This is an entirely local decision made by end point routers E and C.
The use of the backup path involves minimal protocol exchange with the entities over the path and thus the time to restore from a failure is primarily driven by the time to detect the failure of the physical link.
Note the path from the Root to node A now switches to the backup path at node E (E-A-B-C), reaches node C, and then continues on its previous (primary) path to node A (C-B-F-A).
The switching of the pseudowire to the backup paths occurs well before the OSPF timers expire (as a result of missing Hellos).
In fact, the Hello messages to maintain the adjacency now continue to flow over the backup path.
OSPF is unaware of the actual routing over the backup path.
Therefore, when the OSPF Link State Advertisements (LSAs) are broadcast, although they show that the PHY links are down, the states of the pseudowire links remain unchanged and (because of the lower weight of the pseudowire compared to PHY link) there is no change to the OSPF shortest path tree and thus the multicast tree.
Figure 4 shows a double failure situation where node F also fails before PHY link E-C is repaired (it could also be the case that node F is being considered for maintenance during the time that the link E-C is still awaiting repairs).
In this case FRR is not sufficient to repair the failure and thus a new set of OSPF shortest paths and a new multicast tree needs to be computed, as shown.
There is a subtlety in this case.
From OSPF's perspective, there is no difference between the case where the pseudowire between E and C goes over the PHY link or over the backup path.
In this case, while the backup path between E and C is active, the flows from the Root to node A in the new multicast tree and the backup path of EC used in the Root to node C flow overlap on the link EA.
This has the potential for congestion related losses, which is undesirable.Reference [9] proposes a cross-layer approach to reconfigure the multicast tree after the FRR based restoration from the initial failure so that the overlap is avoided, thus preventing congestion on the link EA.
The web based visualization tool, Birdseye, synthesizes and interprets data from a variety of data sources to obtain a comprehensive network view.
Our overall philosophy is to: (a) Display the network in its idealized, failure-free state to operators and network designers.
Furthermore, provide important information for network management decisions, such as link capacities and the failure-free traffic routing.
(b) Maintain real-time state from the tools described in section 3.2.
These include real-time topology discovery, link utilization, Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) reachability using BGP routing tables, and a database of links planned for scheduled maintenance.
(c) Parse differences between the failure-free topology and the real-time topology to determine the key topology changes an operator should be aware of.
We also alert the operator to link congestion and potential pitfalls of scheduled maintenance activities.For item (a), we note that because of the need to interpret the network planner's intent and occasionally inconsistent data, calculating the idealized topology in real-time is not as readily obvious as one might first think; therefore, the inconsistencies are resolved by applying various heuristics to the data obtained from the topology discovery tool, historical data, and auxiliary tables that represent planned network topology changes.
We use the NetDB tool [2] to build a failure-free topology of the network by analyzing router configuration files.
Note that as Figures 2-4 illustrate, the term "topology" in packet networks is often a logical concept for the purpose of layer-3 routing.
Various links can be created between routers and given routing weights.
These links can be physical (encountering no intermediate routers) or logical in nature.
For example, NetDB compiles all the interfaces in the example network with various attributes defined in the configurations.
Table 1 lists some of the interfaces used in the example network in Figure 2.
Interfaces names starting with 'P' correspond to PHY links and those starting with 'SDP' correspond to MPLS pseudowires.
The first row shows the interface P1 on router E with IP address 10.1.1.10 and OSPF weight 1000.
First, we infer links between interfaces based on the IP addresses and subnet masks (e.g., between P1 in E and P1 in C, and between SDP2 in E and SDP2 in C).
This set of inferred links, shown in Table 2, serves as the base topology.
As we discussed earlier, note that the OSPF weight of PHY links, 1000, is higher than that of the pseudowires (which have an OSPF weight 10), which causes OSPF routing to prefer paths using the pseudo wire (SDP) rather than the physical link (P).
Another part of the router configuration specifies the interface IP for each hop in the primary and secondary paths of pseudowires.
Using Tables 1 and 2, these IP addresses can be translated into a set of links.
E.g, the primary path for pseudowire on interface SDP2 in E uses the PHY link to C with interface P1.
On the other hand, the secondary path takes a three-hop route, first going from P2 in A(10.1.1.17), to P1 in B(10.1.1.2), and finally to P2 in C(10.1.1.6).
In our system, based on a regular configuration feed from a production system, we construct the topology and the data tables on a daily basis.
We list the two main reasons that the network data from NetDB can sometimes be incomplete.
(a) NetDB gets a snapshot of router configuration files.
If any links or routers have an outage at that point, they will be missing from the NetDB data.
We overcome this by taking a union across the snapshots of the last several days.
We use multiple heuristics to deal with inconsistencies in the data from different extracts.
E.g., if a given link has (OSPF) weight 100 in one snapshot and 100,000 in another snapshot, we infer that the weight of 100,000 meant that the link was temporarily "costed out" for maintenance and therefore 100 is the correct weight.
On the other hand, if weights are 100 and 150 in two different snapshots, we resolve in favor of the most recent snapshot.
(b) There is a delay for a newly added link to get populated into NetDB.
To deal with this delay, we maintain an auxiliary table of links in the real-time topology that are not in the failure-free topology.
We add this auxiliary set of links to the failure-free topology.
Once we see any of these links in the NetDB topology, we purge them from the auxiliary table.
We now describe the data sources used for collecting the real time topology, link utilization, number of BGP routes, and list of links scheduled to undergo maintenance.
OSPFMon [7] is used for collecting OSPF LSAs from the network.
It establishes a partial adjacency with one or more routers to receive LSAs.
Apart from processing the streaming LSAs to identify and log network events (e.g., router up/down, link up/down etc.), OSPFMon generates periodic snapshots of the network topology (list of routers, list of links between them etc.) in real-time.
The snapshots are generated when a network event occurs.
Most other carrier-based network management implementations access messages or alarms provided by an upstream network management interface, such as an Element Management System or Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP) or Command Line Interface.
We have found through experience that this introduces a layer of interpretation and ambiguity, plus reliance on the switch vendor's network management features.
In contrast, one can view the OSPFMon data collection platform as another network element actually attached to the network.
Therefore, we see the exact same control plane messages that the switches see.
To our knowledge, OSPFMon is unique in this regard.The real-time topology (snapshot from OSPFMon) is then compared to the failure-free topology (after rectification of NetDB and auxiliary tables).
Links present in the failurefree topology, but missing in the real-time topology are deemed to have failed.To avoid overwhelming the system when conditions in the network are changing very rapidly, OSPFMon implements a throttling mechanism, wherein no more than one snapshot is generated per 30 second window.
Furthermore, a new snapshot is generated even when the network is stablei.e., no event has occurred --for a period of six hours.
There are two ways for Birdseye to obtain real-time topology data from OSPFMon: the LSA event stream or the topology snapshots.
The LSA event stream has the advantage that Birdseye gets what it indeed needsincremental changes to the network topology.
The disadvantage is that 1) we need to implement a reliable interface (i.e., with handshaking) to the OSPFMon platform to ensure that no messages are missed and 2) must compile piece-by-piece the incremental information into a full topological view.
We decided to use snapshots because every event in the network creates a new topology snapshot which has information for all links.
In addition, snapshots are generated periodically so that Birdseye can "catch up" with any missing data.
Of course, one limitation of this approach is the delay in visualization (and alert) caused by the throttling mechanism mentioned earlier.
However, after a year of actual network management experience, network operators have found this interval acceptable.
The Multi-Router Traffic Grapher (MRTG) [8] polls the router nodes (typically every 5 minutes) using SNMP to collect link utilization information.
Five minutes intervals are quite sufficient for the IPTV applications where the flows are typically long lasting.
Link congestion is an important indicator to operators who monitor the network because congestion can impact video service in a manner similar to link outages.
E.g., a link with high utilization is an alert to the business operations to add more capacity to this link before adding more channels.Links can get congested even when there is adequate capacity under normal conditions.
This can happen when, as outlined in Section 2.1, a backup path's flow overlaps with the multicast flow.
Another situation of interest is when switch pairs have parallel links between them.
MRTG is used to monitor how the link load balancing algorithm in the switch is operating, how the multicast traffic is mixing with the unicast traffic, and how the High Definition (HD), Standard Definition (SD), and Picture-InPicture (PIP) streams are being load-balanced.
By analyzing link utilization, Birdseye alerts the operator as to whether congestion is because of load imbalance or due to multicast traffic overlap from an outage.
The two conditions require different remedies.
Link congestion due to path overlap requires IGP/PIM to avoid links that have been rerouted by FRR.
Congestion due to load imbalance requires a reallocation of multicast channels between parallel links.
In addition to video distribution, IPTV networks are typically shared as an access network providing Internet connectivity to customers.
Internet-bound streams are differentiated from video and voice and are treated as besteffort traffic.
The stream diverges at the VHO and is routed to an ISP edge router, also called a Provider Edge (PE)-router.
To monitor the health of this service, we look at the BGP sessions at each VHO for signature alarms, such as when BGP session with the route reflector goes down or when the link to the access routers goes down.
In addition, we also monitor the number of routes present at the access routers and look for abnormal deviations from set thresholds.
Operators frequently tweak configurations for migration purposes and these changes have the potential to create error conditions.
Significant route table deviations are a real time indication of a problem in the transit network.
While they do not pinpoint the root cause of the problem, they alert the operators to start investigating well before tickets get created due to customer calls.
Finally, a good example of proactive network management is where the Birdseye tool maintains an interface to an Operations Support System (OSS) that schedules network maintenance activity.
Maintenance activity is often planned far in advance and is often agnostic to real-time network state.
The links or switches planned for maintenance are displayed on the Birdseye graph visualization within a prescribed time frame of their due date.
If a link is down and a maintenance procedure is instigated, this could cause a serious network problem, much akin to a multiple link failure.
On several occasions, network operators averted significant service outages in the network because they were alerted to the potential network impact by Birdseye.
Such examples justify the approach described here.
We illustrate how the Birdseye tool harnesses the multiple information flows across the layers and provides key information needed for proactive network management.
Space does not permit us to describe all of its features and capabilities, so we will focus on a few key ones.The Birdseye visualization tool is deployed in the AT&T Network Operation Center and is actively used by network operators to monitor and perform proactive network management for the U-verse backbone network.
To demonstrate some of the features described above we created a hypothetical topology and hypothetical outages.
The actual U-verse backbone is significantly larger, more complex and has a substantially richer connectivity.
Figures 5 and 6 are actual screen shots from the tool for this hypothetical network and outages.
To save space we show three concurrent link failures (between routers in Cleveland-Cincinnati, New York-Wash.
D.C., and Albuquerque-Knoxville) and a planned maintenance event (Raleigh-Wash.
D.C., shown by a "hard hat" symbol) on a single network snapshot.Clearly, if one were to instigate maintenance activity while the New York-Washington D.C. link is down, the Washington D.C. metro would become isolated from the backbone and those customers would lose all national streaming content.
We guide the operator with appropriate warnings to avoid/postpone such a maintenance event.To visualize an FRR event, the physical link from Albuquerque-Knoxville (shown in dashed green) has failed and the corresponding pseudowire was successfully rerouted to its backup path (shown in dashed red).
As the visualization shows, the backup path for the pseudowire routes through routers in Dallas and Atlanta.
The highlighted backup path alerts operators to cancel any scheduled maintenance on those links because they are carrying multicast traffic.
These links are also vulnerable because their subsequent failure would fail the Albuquerque-Knoxville pseudowire and require slower OSPF/PIM convergence (compared to FRR) for restoration.
For the other two failed physical links (ClevelandCincinnati and New York-Wash.
D.C.) the pseudowires have also failed (shown in thick red) because links on their backup paths have failed and thus FRR was unsuccessful.
However, as described, the network indeed reconfigures its routing when the pseudowires are not restored and the resulting multicast tree shown in Figure 6 represents this rerouting.
The resulting multicast tree is derived using the surviving links, rerouted pseudowires, and link weights of this hypothetical topology.Note that the root of the tree is in Chicago and this multicast view shows how the tree has deviated from its ideal (non-failure) state.
In this case, the only change is that Wash.
D.C. is now a leaf node with Raleigh as the parent, instead of being a child node of New York.
Note that if one carefully examines the routing and FRR paths in Figures 5 and 6, to get to Dallas, multicast packets flow through routers in Kansas City, Denver, Albuquerque, Dallas, Atlanta, Knoxville, back to Atlanta and finally to Dallas.
This illustrates the routing on a national geographical scale analogous to the example of Figure 3.
The orange circle over Miami in Figure 5 is an alert to the operators about BGP connectivity problems affecting customer broadband internet service and Voice-over-IP (VoIP) telephony service in the Miami metro area.With any of these alerts, selecting the alert brings out additional information.
Finally, the network operators would also carefully monitor the link utilization and load balancing in such a situation, as provided by the MRTG tool described earlier.
The key to operating an effective IPTV network, where even small impairments can have consumer-visible impact and potential public relations consequences, is to expand beyond the typical "reactive" network management approach to be able to anticipate and manage potential network problems.
We described our network management approach used to manage AT&T's backbone IPTV network, with over two million subscribers.
By carefully designing network protocols and by distilling network data (historical, real-time, and in anticipation of potential problems) from multiple AT&T-developed systems (such as OSFPMon, NetDB, and maintenance scheduling), and public tools such as MRTG, we compile a comprehensive view of the network that is presented to operators through the Birdseye visualization tool.
We have provided a platform that network operators have found to be indispensible for achieving key objectives for the service.
