With the high throughput offered by solid-state drives (SSDs), multi-SSD volumes have become an attractive storage solution for big data applications.
Unfortunately , the IO stack in current operating systems imposes a number of volume-level limitations, such as per-volume based IO processing in the block layer, single flush thread per volume for buffer cache management, locks for parallel IOs on a file, all of which lower the performance that could otherwise be achieved on multi-SSD volumes.
To address this problem, we propose a new design of per-drive IO processing that separates two key functionalities of IO batching and IO serving in the IO stack.
Specifically, we design and develop Falcon 1 that consists of two major components: Falcon IO Management Layer that batches the incoming IOs at the volume level, and Falcon Block Layer that parallelizes IO serving on the SSD level in a new block layer.
Compared to the current practice, Falcon significantly speeds up direct random file read and write on an 8-SSD volume by 1.77× and 1.59× respectively, and also shows strong scalability across different numbers of drives and various storage controllers.
In addition, Falcon improves the performance of a variety of applications by 1.69×.
The demand of high-performance storage systems is propelled by big data applications that need high IO throughput for processing massive data volumes.
Flashbased solid-state drives (SSDs) provide an attractive option compared to hard disk drives for such applications, due to their high random and sequential performance.
As a common practice, multiple SSDs are increasingly deployed to support a wide variety of applications such as graph analytics [23,50,20,51,31,26], machinelearning [21,30], and key-value stores [11,25].
In this work, we especially use a number of graph analytics systems as motivating examples to illustrate the drawbacks of existing approaches.
To take advantage of high performance of SSDs, throughput-sensitive applications either utilize an application-managed or kernel-managed IO approach as illustrated in Figure 1.
In the first case of applicationmanaged IO, prior projects such as SAFS [49], FlashGraph [50], and Graphene [23] require the application developer to explicitly distribute the data among multiple files, each hosted in independent SSDs.
In this case, there is no abstraction of a volume, and one application IO thread is dedicated to each SSD.
Clearly, such a framework is very complex as applications need to be aware of data partitioning, and determine which application IO thread should perform the IO at any particular instance.On the other hand, for kernel-managed IO, applications can enjoy the benefits of both volumes and batched IO interfaces provided by the operating system, e.g., Linux AIO (asynchronous IO), Solaris KAIO and Windows Overlapped IO.
Such interface allows the applications to submit multiple IOs within a single system call, which provides a clear advantage of ease of programming.
However, because IO functionality is limited to just one application IO thread, the combination of kernel-managed IO and a volume, be it created by Linux (e.g., md, lvm), FreeBSD (e.g., geom) or hardware RAID, would fail to saturate the aggregate bandwidth of multiple SSDs.To mitigate this problem, the applications can spawn a number of dedicated application IO threads to serve the requests in parallel.
Several existing projects adapt this approach, including GridGraph [51] and G-Store [20].
Unfortunately, managing multiple application IO threads using a thread pool is again complicated.
And in many cases, this approach does not achieve the expected goal due to the limitations in IO subsystems [28].
For example, many file systems (e.g., ext4 [10]) apply a per-file inode lock, which prevents scalable random read or write from a single file, irrespective of how many application IO threads are employed.
So is the case for buffered write where a single kernel thread per volume is responsible for flushing the dirty buffer cache to the volume, limiting the write throughput that could potentially be achieved.In this work, we strive to achieve the combined benefits of both approaches, that is, delivering high performance IO on a multi-SSD volume while providing ease of programming to the application developers.
To this end, we design and develop Falcon whose workflow, as shown in Figure 2, presents a new design of per-drive IO processing on multi-SSD volumes.
The key insight is the separation of the two functionalities of IO batching and IO serving in the IO stack.
The former batches and classifies the incoming IOs at the volume level, and is performed in Falcon IO Management Layer (FML).
Meanwhile, the latter serves the IOs in parallel to the SSDs, and is performed in Falcon Block Layer (FBL) using a specialized kernel thread, called Falcon thread.In particular, FBL provides two new techniques: (1) per-drive IO sort and neighbor merge, which limits the scope of sort operations to each SSD and merge to neighboring requests.
In contrast, the Linux IO merge algorithm unnecessarily traverses every IO request for all the member SSDs.
And (2) dynamic tag allocation, which assigns request tags, a limited hardware resource, at runtime.
This helps to reduce the unpredictable blocking in the IO stack, and provide a better mechanism to control the number of active IOs in the pipeline, which is applicable across different storage technologies and vendors.As a result, Falcon allows a dedicated application IO thread to saturate the multi-SSD volume.
Thus developers can concentrate more on algorithmic optimizations, without worrying about the complexity of managing multiple application IO threads and SSDs.
In contrast, Linux follows per-volume approach of mixing IO batching and IO serving tasks in the block layer, where the sequential IO processing and round-robin dispatch lead to many inefficiencies on multi-SSD volumes, and limit the parallelism that could otherwise be achieved.We have evaluated Falcon with a number of microbenchmarks, real applications, and server traces.
Falcon shows strong scalability across different numbers of SSDs, and several different storage controllers.
On an 8-SSD volume, Falcon significantly speeds up direct random read and write throughput on an ext4 file by 1.77× and 1.59× respectively, buffered random write by 1.59×, and shows consistent performance for various stripe size configurations.
In addition, Falcon speeds up graph processing, utility applications, filebench and trace replay by 1.69×.
Lastly, it is important to note that with the new block layer, Falcon is able to saturate a non-volatile-memory-express (NVMe) SSD, delivering 1.13× speedup over the native Linux.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.
Section 2 presents background on volume management and its interaction with the block layer, as well as how an IO request traverses through various layers.
Section 3 quantifies the challenges arising due to per-volume philosophy of Linux IO stack, and presents an overview of Falcon architecture.
Section 4 and 5 present the design and implementation of Falcon components.
We evaluate the performance of our techniques in Section 6, discuss related works in Section 7, and conclude in Section 8.
In this work, while we mostly use Linux to describe the background on the volume management and the block layer; it is worth noting that this IO workflow is generic in nature and many operating systems implement a similar mechanism.
Nevertheless, our design and implementation have been influenced by Linux-specific techniques.In particular, we compare to the Blk-mq [1] block layer which has shown better scaling than the singlequeue block layer.
Also, most of our discussions pertain to single application IO thread using batched IO interfaces such as Linux AIO.
Many kernel daemons such as pdflush and kjournald submit IO internally in a way similar to batched IO interface.
Specifically, pdflush daemon manages the page cache, and has only one dedicated kernel thread per volume to write the dirty pages to storage.
There is no pdflush thread to manage the read, and it hap- Volume Management and Block Layer.
An instance of the block layer is associated to a block device, which is associated to a single drive such as an SSD.
The volume management layer is used to map several physical block devices into a single virtual block device (e.g., md or lvm).
In this layer, IO requests are represented as an object of block IO (bio for short) structure.
The job of the volume manager instance is to break the incoming bio object into multiple (smaller) bio objects destined for member drives, depending on the IO size and the stripe size of the volume, as discussed next.
The original IO is completed only when all the split IOs to different drives are completed.
IO Flow and States.
Figure 3 also shows the flow of an IO request from submission to completion within the block layer.
For simplicity, we group the process to four phases: plug, unplug, dispatch, and completion.
IO batching, merge, and tag allocation are performed in the plug phase.
IO batching provides an opportunity to merge incoming IOs to take advantage of higher sequential throughput.
Also, SSDs provide higher throughput for batched IOs due to parallelism at the hardware level, where more than one IO can be fetched in parallel.
Next, sort and classify operations are performed in the unplug phase, IO requests are dispatched to SSDs in the dispatch phase, and IO completion is performed in the the completion phase where various resources are freed.In each phase, the IO request advances across various states as different tasks are performed on it.
As we will show later, one may use the states to track the IO, and find out the time spent by an IO request in different phases for performance profiling.As soon as an IO request enters the kernel, it is converted to a struct bio object and assumes the ‚start state.
In the case of a multi-SSD volume, the volume manager splits the bio object into multiple smaller objects and moves them to the ƒsplit state.
For example, for a multi-SSD volume of 4KB stripes, an incoming IO request of 64KB would be divided into 16 bio objects, each containing 4KB IO destined to a specific SSD.
Next, a number of block layer instances (one per SSD) handle the incoming IOs as if it were an IO to this particular SSD.
For example, in Figure 3, bio1 proceeds to the block layer instance of SSD1, bio2 to SSD2, and so forth.These split bio objects enter their block layer instances in a sequential fashion, and the plug phase begins.
The operation starts with the bio object being checked against existing IO entries of the per-core plug-list for merge candidates.
As illustrated in Figure 4(a), the plug-list is a private queue to each IO thread, and is used for batching and merging the incoming IO requests.
In other words, the plug-list is shared among multiple block layer instances, and used by all member SSDs of the multi-SSD volume.
In this case, a thread does sequential processing of all previously split bio objects, and presents several drawbacks, as we will discuss shortly.If the bio object is merged, then it moves to the „merge state, and the processing of the next object starts.
Otherwise, a request tag will be requested.
If a tag is available then the bio object is put inside a unique struct request container indexed by the allocated tag, which in turn is queued to the plug-list.
This state is called the ready state as IO requests are dispatched in this form to the physical drivers later.
However, if a request tag were not available, the IO moves to the †wait state, and the thread blocks waiting for a free tag.When the number of IO requests in the plug-list reaches a threshold, an unplug event happens, and the unplug phase starts.
In this phase, all the IOs present in the plug-list of this thread are sorted based on the destination drive and block address information.
Next, the sorted IOs move to the per-core, per-drive software queue of the member drives, and acquire the ‡insert state.In the dispatch phase, the IO requests are dispatched in a round-robin fashion from the software queues to the drives in the same thread context, and moves the IOs to the ˆdispatch state.
If some IOs can not be dispatched, they will be kept in the per-drive dispatch-queue (not shown in the Figure 3) for later processing.
Lastly in the completion phase, when a drive completes an IO, it raises an IRQ event.
The IRQ handler will free the resources and move the IO request to the ‰complete state, where any waiting thread is woken up.
Request Tag.
The request tag is a limited, vendor and technology specific hardware resource [9] For example, the Intel SCU technology has 250 available tags [39], but they are shared among four ports of the controller.
That is, every connected SSDs will compete for the same tag space.
Similarly, the LSI 9300-8i SAS HBA adapter has 10,140 tags, and is shared by all the connected drives.
On the other hand, the Intel AHCI SATA controller has only 32 tags per SATA port, which is not shared.
In this case, the tag count matches with the drive's internal queue size.
For the Samsung 950 pro 512GB NVMe SSD that we use in this work, the tag counts are 1024 per hardware-queue.
This specific drive has 8 hardware queues [38], while SATA SSDs have only one hardware queue.
In this section, we first describe the insufficiencies of current per-volume processing of Linux IO stack, and present the overall architecture of Falcon.
Current multi-SSD volumes follow the per-volume processing, that is, IO serving is tied to the plug-list, and is forced to be performed in a sequential manner within a volume.
In other words, as shown in Figure 4(a), the plug-list mixes IO requests that actually belong to various member drives within a multi-SSD volume.
Moreover, the block layer mingles two unrelated tasks: batching, and merge/tag allocation in its plug phase, and sort and classify in the unplug phase.To illustrate the problems, we run a revised FIO benchmark [12] on various configurations of multi-SSD volumes.
The detailed setup will be presented in Section 6.
In particular, we measure two metrics: the stack latency is the time between the start and insert states, while the device latency is the time between the dispatch and completion states.
We use the former to gauge the software performance, and the latter for device performance.Insufficiency #1: Lack of Parallelism.
As several IO serving tasks are forced to be performed in a single pluglist, the opportunities in parallelizing those tasks are limited.
Under the Linux architecture shown in Figure 4(a), merge, tag allocation, and sort tasks lack parallelism, while dispatch happens in a round-robin way.
Figure 5 quantifies this impact on the stack latency of SSDs within a volume.
Out of 8 SSDs, the slowest drive (sdh) spends at least 55% more time on IO processing (i.e., the stack latency) as compared to the fastest drive (sda).
Interestingly, the latency increases in the same order of the drives.
This is due to the round-robin dispatch where the first drive always gets the highest priority to dispatch followed by the second drive onwards.
As a result of this procedure, later drives have to wait even though the requests are ready to be dispatched.
Insufficiency #2: Inefficient Merge and Sort.
The current merge algorithm traverses the plug-list of the thread to find the merge candidate for a bio object.
It searches all IO requests including those that belong to different drives.
But clearly, they should not be considered as candidates at all.
Also, in the unplug phase, sorting happens on the same thread-specific plug-list, which again means wasteful processing on irrelevant requests.
Making matters worse, the IO count in the plug-list is significantly higher for a multi-SSD volume.
The plug phase ends only when the merge task finds more than 16 IOs (the per-drive threshold) in the plug-list destined to the same drive.
Assuming an uniform distribution of the IOs among all the drives, the total number of the IOs in the plug-list would need to reach 128 for an 8-SSD volume to end the plug phase, as opposed to 16 for 1- SSD.
As a result, the average processing time spent by an IO thread for the 8-SSD volume is significantly higher, over 3.5× more than 1-SSD ( Figure 6(a)), and forces the IO thread to spend 60% time inside the IO stack, pointing to the IO stack as the bottleneck (Figure 6(b)).
Insufficiency #3: Unpredictable Blocking.
In between the merge and sort tasks, the tag allocation is forced to be performed in a sequential manner as well.
So, when a tag allocation fails for any drive member, the executing thread blocks the whole IO stack waiting for a free tag from that drive.
Thus the active IO count present in the Linux IO stack is controlled by the tag count because the blocked IO thread wakes up only when the tag becomes available, i.e. only when an existing IO completes.
This blocking is unpredictable, as the tag count varies and can either be storage controller or drive specific.
Falcon proposes a new approach of the per-drive philosophy, which separates the two operations of IO batching and IO serving by regrouping the tasks by their functionalities in new phases, as shown in Figure 4(b).
Specifically, only IO batching and classify tasks are performed in the plug-list.
And merge, tag allocation, and dispatch tasks move to a new process phase and are performed in per-drive software queues, and can easily be parallelized.
This reduces the amount of work being done in the pluglist, and hence removes the major bottlenecks.
Figure 7 presents the major components of Falcon.
In particular, the new batching and classification phases are performed in the Falcon IO Management Layer (FML for short), while the sort phase along with the process and completion phases are performed in the Falcon Block Layer (FBL).
Moreover, the FML also spawns Falcon threads for parallel IO serving across FBL instances.
We summarize the differences between Falcon and Linux IO stack in Table 1.
For example, the Linux Blkmq architecture allows per-drive sort for 1-SSD system, but it fails to provide the same functionality to multi-SSD volumes.
In contrast, the separation of functionalities allows the Falcon to keep the per-drive philosophy intact in its FBL block layer, as the IO serving operations are performed in the per-drive software queue.
In addition, dynamic tag allocation in FBL removes the tag allocation from the plug phase and moves it to just before dispatch.
This provides a more uniform and predictable criterion to control the outstanding IOs in the IO stack pipeline.
IO batching is performed in two phases: batching and classification.
FML starts its batching phase as soon as a new (split) bio arrives, and pushes the object into the plug-list of the thread.
Next, the volume manager sends the next bio object of the original IO request.
If there are no more objects, the volume manager processes the next request from the batched IO interface.
This bio object is again enqueued to the same plug-list by the FML layer.As this process progresses, an unplug event will occur.
At this point, the current batching phase stops, and the classification phase begins, thereby, all the bio entries in the plug-list are classified based on destination drives.Batching and classification tasks are performed using bio objects in Falcon, as opposed to request containers in Linux, hence we add prev and next pointers to the bio structure, so that the bio objects can be chained in the doubly linked-list plug-list.
Additionally, at the end of the classification phase, all the IOs have to be enqueued to the per-core per-drive software queue.
However, software queues are protected by spin locks, and acquiring them becomes mandatory each time an IO need to be enqueued.
To this end, we collect the requests in temporary per-drive queues during the classify operation.
At the end, all bio objects from the temporary queues move to respective software queues, thus acquiring the spin lock only once.
At the end of the classification phase, all the IOs reside in the per-drive software queue, and hence the FBL instances can perform IO serving tasks in parallel, which is not possible in Linux.
To this end, FML spawns one kernel thread per participating FBL instance for this group of batched IOs.
We call each thread a Falcon thread, and is responsible for IO serving tasks.
In our implementation, the Falcon threads are spawned using Linux's kblockd workqueue object.
However, the CPU affinity of a kworker is decided by the thread that requests a kworker.
Should all the Falcon threads share the same core as the IO issuing thread, it would defeat the purpose of parallel IO serving.
To address this problem, we modify the workqueue API invocations so that we can use the CPU affinity of each Falcon thread to pin them to different cores.
Ideally it should be NUMA-aware, that is, on a core of the socket that hosts the corresponding storage controller adapter.
We manage this information inside hardware context object of each drive.The completion phase is also executed in the same core to which the Falcon thread is pinned.
As the CPU core information is now available, the IRQ handler can send an inter-processor interrupt (IPI) to this core to perform the completion phase, or execute directly if the IRQ is received on the same core as that of the Falcon thread.The job of completion phase is three-fold: freeing up bio objects, request tag and other resources; waking up any thread that is waiting for IO completion; and requesting a Falcon thread to resume processing if the internal queue of the drive becomes full at the last dispatch.
In performing those tasks, a completion thread accesses those data structures that are set by the Falcon thread.
Hence by running the completion on the same core, Falcon avoids the cache migration of those objects, making completion a cache friendly phase .
0 100 200 300 400 500 device latency stack latency sda sdb sdc sdd sde sdf sdg sdh Latency (usec) |_______8-SSD volume member drives's stack latency_______| Figure 9: Drive and stack latency comparison of 8-SSD volume.
Falcon is able to make the stack latency uniform as well as smaller than the device latency.
One implication of separating the merge task from the batching task is removal of the unplug criteria from the plug phase.
The unplug event is raised when the number of requests evaluated for merging goes beyond a threshold in the plug phase.
As we have mentioned earlier, the criteria varies depending on the IO distribution to each drive, and the maximum value of the threshold is 128 for 8-SSD volume in a uniform distribution.
To achieve more predictable unplug events, Falcon utilizes two new thresholds (low watermark and high watermark).
Simply put, we maintain the IO requests in the plug-list and finish the batching phase when the count reaches beyond a threshold.
Increasing the watermark by too much would increase the stack latency, and as a result the device would remain idle because more IO requests are still being processed.
On the other hand, lowering the watermark may potentially reduce the benefit of batching.
An equilibrium is desired so that the drives are kept busy as long as there are sufficient number of IO requests.
Given a typical internal queue size of 32 for an SSD, we choose the product of device count and this queue size as the high watermark value, e.g., 256 for an 8-SSD volume.
Figure 9 plots the stack latency for Falcon using the high watermark.
Since the ordering of IO state has changed, here we measure the new stack latency as the time between the start to ready phase.
One can see that Falcon is able to achieve similar stack latency for different drives, compared to a large variance in Linux.
Specifically, Falcon achieves around 320 microseconds, smaller than 404.7 microseconds device latency from the SSDs.
As such, the stack and drive latency are nicely balanced.It should be noted that the device latency is a function of the queue depth, i.e. a busy SSD will have higher device latency than one that is lightly loaded.
In Linux's case, the device is operating at lower queue depth, as the application IO thread is not able to dispatch enough requests.
In contrast, thanks to parallelism, Falcon threads in Falcon are able to dispatch more IOs to SSDs, and keep them busy all the time.
As a result, the stack latency is smaller than the device latency.
So, even with higher stack latency than Linux, Falcon is able to get higher throughput as we will show in Section 6.
Latency.
Falcon uses the low watermark to facilitate latency-sensitive applications, where only fewer IOs are submitted.
The idea is to avoid an extra context switch when the IO demand is low.
Here we take current value of 16 requests per drive as the basis, and set the low watermark as the product of this value and the drive count, e.g., 128 IOs for 8-SSD volume.
It should be noted that if fewer IOs are submitted in a batched IO interface or just one IO using POSIX IO interface, the batching phase does not wait for more incoming IOs, and an unplug event occurs at the end of the submission.
For 1-SSD system, Falcon always performs synchronous IO serving.
Note that it is also possible to let the users choose both high and low watermarks depending on their need.
For such applications, IO serving will happen in the context of the IO issuing thread as the plug-list would not cross the low watermark.
Figure 10 shows that Falcon improves the IO latency (from the application perspective) by nominal 3% for various multi-SSD volumes (RAID0, 4KB stripe size) when just one IO of size 4KB (POSIX IO) is active in the whole IO pipeline.
Falcon Block Layer (FBL) is the new block layer that performs the IO serving tasks.
FBL instances receive unsorted bio objects in their per-core, per-drive software queues.
Compared to the existing approach where most of the operations happen in the per-thread plug-list, our approach enables per-drive processing, which can be divided into three phases (sort, process, and completion) as shown in Figure 11.
Mechanism.
The software queue is a per-core queue, so a single drive has many associated software queues, one for each CPU core.
Hence the sort phase first aggregates the bio objects from all of the software queues of the drive in a private queue (a doubly linked-list), and then performs sorting on it.
This results in all neighboring IOs being adjacent to each other in the private queue, thus only a neighbor merge is required in the process phase, which happens as follows.A Falcon thread removes the first bio object from the private queue, allocates a tag, and puts it inside a request container object indexed by the tag.
Then, the merge task checks the next bio entry in the private queue to see if it can merge with the current container.
If it succeeds, the next entry in the queue will be tried for merge.
Otherwise, the container object will be dispatched.
The process goes on till either all entries are dispatched or the internal queue of the drive becomes full.The internal queue of an SSD may become full due to its limited size.
In this case, all the requests need to be preserved to be dispatched later.
The last request container is kept in the dispatch-queue.
We introduce a new per-drive queue, called bio-queue.
Its role is similar to dispatch-queue, but keeps the remaining bio entries of the private queue.
Later, when triggered, IOs are first dispatched from the dispatch-queue followed by the bioqueue.
The separation of IOs in different queues are required as the IOs are in different states.
The order maintains the prior behavior of request dispatch.The sort task requires multiple pass over IOs in the private queue which collects bio objects from software queues.
It is possible that the sort task might dominate the overall processing in the IO stack.
We leave the investigation of a new data-structure for queues as future work.
Advantages.
The new merge technique is very simple and presents several benefits.
First, sorting runs efficiently with less CPU usage due to smaller per-drive sort space.
Second, the merge algorithm needs to evaluate its neighbor requests only as they are already sorted, which reduces the CPU utilization further.
Third, since merge happens on the private queue containing IOs from software queues of the different cores, one can automatically achieve merging across multiple IO issuing threads.It is worth noting that efficient sort and neighbor merge are generic improvements to Linux IO stack.
For example, single application IO thread is not able to saturate an NVMe SSD (Samsung 950 pro 512GB NVMe) in Linux [18].
However, as shown in Figure 12 Figure 12: Impact on NVMe SSD for random read ered for merging for NVMe SSDs, and if that fails, the older IO is dispatched and the most recent is kept in the plug-list.
In contrast, Falcon does not differentiate between NVMe and SATA SSDs.
In this case, per-drive sort and neighbor merge makes the batching efficient, without any sacrifice on latency.
Problems.
Controlling the active IO count in the IO pipeline based on a vendor and technology specific tag count often leads to unpredictable results for random IOs in multi-SSD volumes.
Random IOs are inherently skewed towards some drives within any small time duration.
This leads to unfairness in the tag allocation for member drives, resulting in compromised performance for Intel C602 AHCI SATA III connected volume as shown in Figure 13(a).
The reason is that after allocating 32 tags for a SATA SSD, the IO thread would block for an additional tag for the SSD, even if other SSDs might have available tags.
In a skewed IO distribution case, 2-SSD SATA volume can only maintain less than 40 active IOs in the IO pipeline against the available tag of 64 as shown in Figure 13(b), resulting in the throughput drop.
When there are sufficient number of tags such as LSI HBA which has over 10,000 tags, the volume does scale on multiple SSDs on both Linux and Falcon.
Dynamic Tag Allocation.
To provide a predictable behavior, a uniform count of active IOs must be maintained in the IO pipeline, regardless of the storage technology or vendor.
Therefore, Falcon performs the tag allocation dynamically, i.e. only if a dispatch is required in the process phase, as shown in Figure 11.
The main benefit is improved queue utilization because more IOs are allowed to reside in the IO pipeline without acquiring a tag.
This offsets the skewness of random IO distribution.
Figure 13(a) compares the throughput scaling of Linux and Falcon for a 2-SSD volume connected using Intel C602 AHCI SATA III.
The throughput improvement is due to improved tag utilization of both the member drives as shown in Figure 13(b).
The drop in tag usage between 5-19 seconds is due to highly skewed workload distribution (random read in FIO benchmark), where only one drive's internal queue is fully utilized.
However, Falcon can still get close to 2× IO performance improvement over 1-SSD volume.
The technique results in 52% and 23% improvement in random read and write respectively, saturating the volume completely.
Back Pressure.
Tag allocation serves as a back pressure point in the Linux IO stack.
That is, if the number of in-flight IOs were to increase beyond the available tags, the IO issuing thread would go to sleep and stop submitting new IOs.
Moving the tag allocation from the plug phase also removes the back pressure point in Falcon, and hence the IO issuing thread could potentially keep submitting as many requests as it can, and consume a lot of system resources such as memory.To address this problem, Falcon proposes a per-drive limit.
When the number of IOs increases beyond a highpressure point, the thread stops IO submission in FML and sleeps.
The thread will become active again when the number of requests drops below a low-pressure point in the whole IO stack, thus controlling the in-flight IO count in the whole IO pipeline.
The number of requests in the bio-queue is used to determine the pressure point.
For a multi-drive volume, the pressure point is equal to the product of per-drive pressure point and drive count.The pressure point is a different threshold than the watermark.
The former is about when to block IO processing thread, while the latter is used to decide when to do synchronous or parallel dispatch.
The machine used for the experiments has dual-socket of Intel Xeon CPU E5-2620 2GHz with six cores each, thus total 24 threads due to hyper-threading, and 32GB DRAM.
We use eight Samsung EVO 850 500GB SSDs connected using LSI SAS9300-8i HBA which supports SATA III SSDs.
The system also has a Samsung 950 pro 512GB NVMe SSD with PCI 3.0 interface, two Intel AHCI SATA III ports, four SATA II ports, and four SCU ports which supports SATA II SSDs.
We use four Intel 520 120GB SSDs for testing SCU ports.We run the tests on Linux kernel version 4.4.0 with the Blk-mq block layer [1] (which performs better than the single-queue block layer).
The blk-mq architecture has been completely integrated with SCSI layer and other drivers (called scsi-mq) in this kernel.
Currently, blk-mq does not have any configurable IO scheduling policy.We have implemented a prototype of Falcon in about 600 lines of C code with the aforementioned Linux kernel.
We use the md software as the volume manager with default stripe size of 4KB in a RAID-0 configuration.
By default we use raw volumes, and also evaluate ext4 and XFS file system in a number of cases.
We use a modified FIO in these tests.
FIO [12] provides a number of IO engines such as AIO and synchronous POSIX IO and outputs a number of parameters including throughput, IOPS, and latency.
However, FIO spends a lot of time in userspace (more than 35%), thus can not submit IOs as fast as a single application thread can otherwise.
To address this problem, we modify FIO to instead simply replay the traces as fast as possible.
Ext4 File Throughput.
The per-inode lock on ext4 File System does not allow Linux to saturate the 8-SSD volume even using multiple application IO threads.
However, Falcon can saturate the volume using just one application IO thread, as shown in Figure 14.
The improvement is due to parallelism at block layer tasks (sort, merge, tag allocation and dispatch).
Overall, Falcon achieves 1.77× and 1.59× random read and write throughput compared to Linux on an ext4 file in 8-SSD volume.
Buffered Write Throughput.
Figure 15 shows improvement in buffered write throughput when 8 application IO threads are doing random write on multi-SSD volumes.
Again, Linux is not able to achieve beyond 800 MB/s throughput on 8-SSD system because Linux buffer cache management allows only one pdflush thread to write the dirty buffer to the volume.
In contrast, Falcon achieves 1.38× and 1.59× improvement compared to Linux in raw 4-SSD and 8-SSD volumes.
Varying SSD Count.
Figure 16 shows that Falcon delivers performance improvement by 1.92×, 3.65× 6.02× for random read, and 1.86×, 3.34× and 6.29× for random write in 2-SSD, 4-SSD and 8-SSD volumes over one SSD respectively.
This clearly indicates that Falcon is scalable when more SSDs are added to the volume.
For the 8-SSD volume (LSI HBA), Falcon achieves 1.83×, 1.66×, 3.42× and 2.73× speedup for random read, random write, sequential read and sequential write, respectively.
When using the SCU controller for 4-SSD volume, Falcon can also achieve 1.25×, 1.08×, 1.59× and 1.85× respectively, again saturating the volume completely.
Varying Stripe Size.
Figure 17 shows the random and sequential IO throughput on an 8-SSD volume for a variety of stripe size configurations.
Random IO (4KB IO size) is highly susceptible to stripe size configuration as a better IO distribution to all the member drives will maximize the IO, while a skewed distribution would not.
Fig- ure 17 shows that 4KB stripe size is the best, while 32KB stripe is the worst for the random IO pattern generated by the FIO.
In the best case, Falcon provides 1.83× and 1.66× random read and write throughput respectively.
Sequential IO (64KB IO size) generates uniform IO load to each member drive of the volume.
For 4KB stripes, Falcon provides 3.42× and 2.73× sequential read and write throughput respectively compared to Linux.
Falcon saturates the 8-SSD volume irrespective of stripe size, while Linux can saturate the volume only when the IO size is smaller than or equal to the stripe size.
This is because the Linux block layer is written with the assumption of a single drive.
In other words, the Linux block layer assumes that split has been performed for the IOs larger than 1 MB (maximum IO size in the block layer), and wrongly determines that further merging would no longer be needed on split IOs.
In contrast, FBL enables the merge in case of IO split, and enjoys the performance benefit from the full sequential IOs.
Advantage and Scalability.
There are two important observations when running Falcon on an 8-SSD volume.
First, Falcon saturates the sequential read/write completely ( Figure 16).
Second, for random read and write tests, Falcon achieves 97.6% and 98.9% throughput of an ideal system, where one application IO thread is dedicated to submit batched IOs to each SSD independently, so that IO skewness is not the concern.
To understand the maximum random throughput achievable by an application IO thread, we run the same experiment in a null block device.
The device is a standard Linux driver without any backup storage, and acknowledges the IOs as soon as received.
Falcon can provide up to 3.7GB per second random read, which would be roughly equivalent to the aggregate throughput of 16 SSDs.
However, it should be noted that null block device avoids many operations which otherwise were needed for a real volume.
We expect that spawning more than one application IO thread will saturate 16 or more SSDs.
All the tests in this section are performed in XFS File System.
For Linux, XFS tends to outperform ext4 for parallel reads as it does not acquire an inode lock.
Since Falcon always deploys a single application IO thread, the choice of file system would not matter.
Utility Applications.
We choose copy and tar to show the effectiveness of Falcon.
Copy represents parallel data copying between the volume and a 24GB RAM disk.
Specifically, CopyTo copies the 24GB file from the RAM disk to the volume.
CopyFrom does the reverse.
On the other hand, Tar and Untar use pbzip2, a parallel implementation of bzip2.
As shown in Figure 19(a), Falcon speeds up CopyFrom, CopyTo, Tar and Untar by 1.63×, 2.81×, 1.29× and 1.09× respectively.
The benefits are lower for Tar and Untar as they are more CPU intensive.
Filebench.
We also run Fileserver (2:1 read/write ratio), Webserver (mostly read with random appends) and Webproxy (read only) personality in Filebench suite of benchmarks.
Figure 19(b) shows that Falcon performs 1.39×, 1.60× and 2× better than Linux when the benchmarks ran on around 64GB of data.
Graph Processing.
We choose G-Store [20], a semiexternal graph processing system as a representative usecase for high throughput application to demonstrate the effect of Falcon.
In particular, we evaluate four different graph algorithms including breadth-first search (BFS) [7,14], kCore [33,29], connected component (CC) [35] and page rank (PR) [2] Figure 20 shows that Falcon significantly speeds up the graph processing by 4.12× and 1.78× compared to using one and eight IO threads in Linux.
In particular, Falcon achieves more than 5× speedup for BFS and kCore compared to using one IO thread in Linux, and 2× improvement over 8 IO threads.
In the case of CC and PageRank, Falcon also provides 2 to 3× improvement over using a single IO thread.
We run application traces collected at University of Massachusetts Amherst [41] and Florida International University [19].
Table 2 provides the information on these traces.
UM-Financial1 and UM-Financial2 represent the OLTP type applications, while UM-Websearch1 and UM-Websearch2 are websearch traces.
On the other hand, FIU-Home, FIU-Mail, FIU-Webuser and FIUWeb-vm represent the traces from home directory, mail, web user, and webmail proxy and online course management system.
The traces contain the lower-level IOs, i.e., at the logical block address.
Almost all the write operations are caused by kjournald or pdflush daemons which run in the kernel space.
These daemons behave more like a batched Linux AIO interface.We replay the traces by submitting IOs as fast as the system allows.
Figure 21 shows Falcon can extract Prior works [4,5,46,37,43,45,48,17,36,47] mostly aim to improve the IO stack for one drive by proposing changes in the IO stack and/or hardware, leaving behind a number of issues pertaining to multi-SSD volumes.
Different from these approaches, we focus on multi-SSD volumes and aim to achieve both the IO scalability and the ease of programming.
Application-managed IO approach [49,50,23] partitions a file in different SSDs and proposes a userspace abstraction to aggregate the file content.
As a result, it introduces a lot of complexity in the application, and lacks support of POSIX file system [49].
Also, there are application level restrictions, such as only integer number of processing cores for each SSD (e.g., one compute thread for each SSD in Graphene [23]).
Various works [40,27,22,34] have identified the importance of IO stack optimization, and have proposed various changes including the block layer to accelerate application performance.
A nice description of the time spent on different layers of the IO platform has been analyzed in [13].
Problems with sub-page buffered write is identified [3] and techniques have been proposed to improve the performance.
Wang et al. [44] propose fairness and efficiency in tiered storage system.
Our work is in-tune with these efforts and especially identifies improvements in the IO stack for multi-SSD volumes.Linux kernel developers have made many improvement in various locking semantics [15,16,24], however, locking in parallel IO from the same file still remains an issue as observed by Min et al. [28] in a many-core system.
An enhanced storage layer has been proposed in [8] that exports information to file systems to bridge the information gap.
Our system utilizes such information within a new layer (FML) to improve the performance in multi-SSD volumes.Storage area network (SAN) solutions provide aggregated SSDs as block device services, and scale in terms of multiple clients.
However, the local file system at client side will still have all the constraints that we have discussed.
Chen et al. [6] have developed new batched IO interface, and integrated it with NFS compound procedure using a userspace NFS client.
In such cases, Falcon will become a natural choice of IO stack to provide a better client-side IO stack to take advantage of the faster SAN/NFS storage.Big data applications such as WiscKey (a key-value store) [25] deploy a complex mechanism of a thread pool to serve IOs in one SSD.
To scale to multiple SSDs, they need to fine-tune the number of threads.
Falcon will enable such applications to move towards just one thread, and can saturate more SSDs if AIO interfaces are used, thereby providing simplicity and scalability both.Lastly, many graph applications [21,32] bypass the random IO problem in multi-SSD volumes by fetching the whole data in each iteration.
However, Vora et al. [42] show that the performance of many graph algorithms can be improved by doing selective random IO.
We believe that Falcon will become a platform of choice for many IO-intensive applications including graph analytics.
In this work, we have identified that the separation of two IO processing tasks, i.e., IO batching and IO serving in the block layer, holds the key to improve the throughput in multi-SSD volumes.
To achieve this goal, Falcon proposes a new IO stack to enforce per-drive processing that improves the IO stack performance and parallelizes the IO serving tasks.
Compared to current practice, Falcon significantly accelerates a variety of applications from utility applications to graph processing, and also shows strong scalability across different numbers of drives, and various storage controllers.
The authors thank the USENIX ATC'17 reviewers and our shepherd Sorav Bansal for their suggestions.
This work was supported in part by National Science Foundation CAREER award 1350766 and grant 1618706.
