Traditionally, communications and data service networks were built on proprietary platforms that had to meet very specific availability, reliability, performance, and service response time requirements.
Today, communications service providers are challenged to meet their needs cost-effectively for new architectures, new services, and increased bandwidth, with highly available, scalable, secure, and reliable systems that have predictable performance and that are easy to maintain and upgrade.
This paper presents the technological trend of migrating from proprietary to open platforms based on software and hardware building blocks.
The paper focuses on the ongoing work by the Carrier Grade Linux (CGL) working group at the Open Source Development Labs, examines the CGL architecture, the requirements from the latest specification release, and presents some of the needed kernel features that are not currently supported on Linux.
The demand for rich media and enhanced communications services is rapidly leading to significant changes in the communications industry such as the convergence of data and voice technologies.
The transition to packet-based, converged, multi-service IP networks require a carrier grade infrastructure based on interoperable hardware and software building blocks, management middleware and applications, implemented with standard interfaces.The communications industry is witnessing a technology trend moving away from proprietary systems toward open and standardized systems, built using modular and flexible hardware and software (operating system and middleware) common off the shelf components.
The trend is to proceed forward delivering next generation and multimedia communication services, using open standard carrier grade platforms.
This trend is motivated by the expectations that open platforms are going to reduce the cost and risks of developing and delivering rich communications services; they will enable faster time to market and ensure portability and interoperability between various components from different providers.One frequently asked question is: How can we meet tomorrow's requirements using existing infrastructures and technologies?
Proprietary platforms are closed systems, expensive to develop, and often lacking support of the current and upcoming standards.
Using such closed platforms to meet tomorrow's requirements for new architectures and services is almost impossible.
A uniform, open software environment with the characteristics demanded by telecom applications, combined with commercial off-the-shelf software and hardware components is a necessary part of these new architectures.Three key industry consortia are defining hardware and software high availability specifications that are directly related to telecom platforms: -The PCI Industrial Computer Manufacturers Group [1] (PICMG) defines standards for high availability (HA) hardware.-The Open Source Development Labs [2] (OSDL) Carrier Grade Linux [3] (CGL) working group was established in January 2002 with the goal of enhancing the Linux operating system, to achieve an Open Source platform that is highly available, secure, scalable and easily maintained, suitable for carrier grade systems.-The Service Availability Forum [4] (SA Forum) defines the interfaces of HA middleware and focusing on APIs for hardware platform management and for application failover in the application API.
SA compliant middleware will provide services to -Vendor independent: With Linux, you no longer have to be locked into a specific vendor.
Linux is supported on multiple platforms.an application that needs to be HA in a portable way.
Figure 2: Open development process of the Linux kernel In this paper, we refer to the term Carrier Grade on many occasions.
Carrier grade is a term for public network telecommunications products that require a reliability percentage up to 5 or 6 nines of uptime.Other contributing factors include Linux' support for a broad range of processors and peripherals, commercial support availability, high performance networking, and the proven record of being a stable, and reliable server platform.5 nines of uptime refer to 99.999% of uptime (i.e. 5 minutes of downtime per year).
This level of availability is usually associated with Carrier Grade servers.
6 nines of uptime refer to 99.9999% of uptime (i.e. 30 seconds of downtime per year).
This level of availability is usually associated with Carrier Grade switches.
The Linux kernel is missing several features that are needed in a telecom environment, and it is not adapted to meet telecom requirements in various areas such as reliability, security, and scalability.
To help the advancement of Linux in the telecom space, OSDL established the CGL working group.
The group specifies and help implement an Open Source platform targeted for the communication industry that is highly available, secure, scalable and easily maintained, suitable for carrier grade systems.
This section describes briefly the motivating reasons in favor of using Linux on Carrier Grade systems, versus continuing with proprietary operating systems.
These motivations include: -Cost: Linux is available free of charge in the form of a downloadable package from the Internet.
The CGL working group is composed of several members from network equipment providers, system integrators, platform providers, and Linux distributors, all of them contributing to the requirement definition of Carrier Grade Linux, helping Open Source projects to meet these requirements, and in some cases starting new Open Source projects.
Many of the CGL members companies have contributed pieces of technologies to Open Source in order to make the Linux Kernel a more viable option for telecom platforms.
For instance, the Open Systems Lab [5] from Ericsson Research has contributed three key technologies: the Transparent IPC [6], the Asynchronous Event Mechanism [7], and the Distributed Security Infrastructure [8].
In a different -Source code availability: With Linux, you gain full access to the source code allowing you to tailor the kernel to your needs.
-Open development process (Figure 2): The development process of the kernel is open to anyone to participate and contribute.
The process is based on the concept of "release early, release often."
-Peer review and testing resources: With access to the source code, people using a wide variety of platform, operating systems, and compiler combinations; can compile, link, and run the code on their systems to test for portability, compatibility and bugs.
direction, there are already Linux distributions, MontaVista [10] for instance, that are providing CGL distribution based on the CGL requirement definitions.
Many companies are also either deploying CGL, or at least evaluating and experimenting with it.Consequently, CGL activities are giving much momentum for Linux in the telecom space allowing it to be a viable option to proprietary operating system.
Member companies of CGL are releasing code to Open Source and making some of their proprietary technologies open, going forward from closed platforms to open platforms that use CGL.
The CGL Working Group has identified three main categories of application areas into which they expect the majority of applications implemented on CGL platforms to fall.
These application areas are gateways, signaling, and management servers.-Gateways are bridges between two different technologies or administration domains.
For example, a media gateway performs the critical function of converting voice messages from a native telecommunications time-division-multiplexed network, to an Internet protocol packet-switched network.
A gateway processes a large number of small messages received and transmitted over a large number of physical interfaces.
Gateways perform in a timely manner very close to hard real-time.
They are implemented on dedicated platforms with replicated (rather than clustered) systems used for redundancy.-Signaling servers handle call control, session control, and radio recourse control.
A signaling server handles the routing and maintains the status of calls over the network.
It takes the request of user agents who want to connect to other user agents and routes it to the appropriate signaling.
Signaling servers require soft real time response capabilities less than 80 milliseconds, and may manage tens of thousands of simultaneous connections.
A signaling server application is context switch and memory intensive due to requirements for quick switching and a capacity to manage large numbers of connections.-Specifications: The specifications sub-group is responsible for defining a set of requirements that lead to enhancements in the Linux kernel, that are useful for carrier grade implementations and applications.
The group collects, categorizes, and prioritizes the requirements from participants to allow reasonable work to proceed on implementations.
The group also interacts with other standard defining bodies, open source communities, developers and distributions to ensure that the requirements identify useful enhancements in such a way, that they can be adopted into the base Linux kernel.-Management servers handle traditional network management operations, as well as service and customer management.
These servers provide services such as: a Home Location Register and Visitor Location Register (for wireless networks) or customer information (such as personal preferences including features the customer is authorized to use).
Typically, management applications are data and communication intensive.
Their response time requirements are less stringent by several orders of magnitude, compared to those of signaling and gateway applications.
The CGL working group has the vision that nextgeneration and multimedia communication services can be delivered using Linux based open standards platforms for carrier grade infrastructure equipment.
To achieve this vision, the working group has setup a strategy to define the requirements and architecture for the Carrier Grade Linux platform and develop a roadmap for the platform and to promote development of a stable platform upon which commercial components and services can be deployed.In the course of achieving this strategy, the OSDL CGL working group, is creating the requirement definitions, and identifying existing Open Source projects that support the roadmap to implement the required components and interfaces of the platform.
When an Open Source project does not exist to support a certain requirement, OSDL CGL is launching (or support the launch of) new Open Source projects to implement missing components and interfaces of the platform.The CGL working group consists of three distinct subgroups that work together.
These sub-groups are: specification, proof-of-concept, and validation.
Explanations of the responsibilities of each sub-group are as follows:- These requirements support the use of multiple carrier server systems to provide higher levels of service availability through redundant resources and recovery capabilities, and to provide a horizontally scaled environment supporting increased throughput.
The security requirements are aimed at maintaining a certain level of security while not endangering the goals of high availability, performance, and scalability.
The requirements support the use of additional security mechanisms to protect the systems against attacks from both the Internet and intranets, and provide special mechanisms at kernel level to be used by telecom applications.
as availability and scalability are related to the CGL enhancements to the operating system.
Enhancements may also be made to hardware interfaces, interfaces to the user level or application code and interfaces to development and debugging tools.
In some cases, to access the kernel services, user level library changes will be needed.
-Diskless systems: support diskless systems which load and run applications via the network.These requirements support vertical and horizontal scaling of carrier server systems such as the addition of hardware resources to result in acceptable increases in capacity.
The availability requirements support heightened availability of carrier server systems, such as improving the robustness of software components or by supporting recovery from failure of hardware or software.
The tools requirements provide capabilities to facilitate diagnosis.
Examples of these requirements include: -Support the usage of a kernel debugger.
Examples of these requirements include:-Support for Kernel dump analysis.
-RAID 1: support for RAID 1 offers mirroring to provide duplicate sets of all data on separate hard disks.-Support for debugging multi-threaded programs -Watchdog timer interface: support for watchdog timers to perform certain specified operations when timeouts occur.
The work on the next version of the OSDL CGL requirements, version 3.0, started in January 2004 with focus on advanced requirement areas such as manageability, serviceability, tools, security, standards, performance, hardware, clustering and availability.
With the success of CGL's first two requirement documents, OSDL CGL working group anticipate that their third version will be quite beneficial to the Carrier Grade ecosystem.
Official release of the CGL requirement document Version 3.0 is expected in October 2004.-Support for Disk and volume management: to allow grouping of disks into volumes.
-Ethernet link aggregation and link failover: support bonding of multiple NIC for bandwidth aggregation and provide automatic failover of IP addresses from one interface to another.
-Support for application heartbeat monitor: monitor applications availability and functionality.
The serviceability requirements support servicing and managing hardware and software on carrier server systems.
These are wide-ranging set requirements that, put together, help support the availability of applications and the operating system.
There are several enhancements to the Linux Kernel that are required by the communication industry, to help adopt Linux on their carrier grade platforms, and support telecom applications.
These enhancements (Figure 4) fall into the following categories availability, security, serviceability, performance, scalability, reliability, standards, and clustering.Examples of these requirements include: -Support for producing and storing kernel dumps.
-Support for dynamic debug of the kernel and running applications.
-Support for platform signal handler enabling infrastructures to allow interrupts generated by hardware errors to be logged using the event logging mechanism.
-Support for remote access to event log information.
OSDL CGL specifies the requirements that support performance levels necessary for the environments expected to be encountered by carrier server systems.
Examples of these requirements include: -Support for application (pre) loading.
theless, some of the enhancements are targeted for inclusion in kernel version 2.7.
Other enhancement will follow in later kernel releases.
Meanwhile, all enhancements, in the form of packages, kernel modules and patches, are available from their respective project web sites.
The CGL 2.0 requirements are in-line with the Linux development community.
The purpose of this project is to form a catalyst to capture common requirements from end-users for a CGL distribution.
With a common set of requirements from the major Network Equipment Providers, developers can be much more productive and efficient within development projects.
Many individuals within the CGL initiative are also active participants and contributors in the Open Source development community In this section, we provide some examples of missing features and mechanisms from the Linux kernel that are necessary in a telecom environment.
Linux should be able to run in a routing environment with fast recovery of routes when network failure is detected.
This is achievable by having around 2000 routes/sec.
Latency is not really an issue in a PC environment (a few ms doesn't make a big difference).
What is important is to have a predictable performance from 10.000 to 500.000 routes.
However, the faster is always better.
To support the various routing requirements of telecom platforms, Linux should support: -Implementation of multi-FIB using tree (radix, patricia, etc.).
It is very important to have predictable performance in insert/delete/lookup from 10 to 500k routes.
And, if possible, to have the same data structure for both IPv4 and IPv6.
-Socket and ioctl interfaces for addressing multi-FIB, and -Multi-FIB support for neighbors (arp) Providing these implantations in Linux will affect a large part of net/core, net/ipv4 and net/ipv6; these subsystems (mostly network layer) will need to be rewritten.
Other areas will have minimal impact at the source code level, mostly at the transport layer (socket, TCP, UDP, RAW, NAT, IPIP, IGMP, etc).
There is no Open Source solutions or patches that are available.
Operating systems for telecom applications must ensure that they can deliver a high response rate with minimum downtime, less than five minutes per year of downtime, including hardware, operating system and software upgrade.
In addition to this goal, a carriergrade system also must take into account such characteristics as scalability, high availability and performance.
For such systems, thousands of requests must be handled concurrently without affecting the overall system's performance, even under extremely high loads.
Subscribers can expect some latency time when issuing a request, but they are not willing to accept an unbounded response time.
Such transactions are not handled instantaneously for many reasons, and it can take some milliseconds or seconds to reply.
Waiting for an answer reduces applications' abilities to handle other transactions.
Many different solutions have been envisaged to improve Linux's capabilities using different types of software organization, such as multithreaded architectures, by implementing efficient POSIX interfaces or by improving the scalability of existing kernel routines.
We think that none of these solutions are adequate for true Carrier Grade servers.
As a result, Ericsson has designed and developed the needed mechanism for telecom application and released it to Open Source under the GPL license.
The solution is called Asynchronous Event Mechanism (AEM); it provides asynchronous execution of processes in the Linux kernel.
AEM implements a native support for asynchronous events in the Linux kernel and aims to bring carrier-grade characteristics to Linux in areas of scalability and soft real-time responsiveness.
In addition, AEM offers event-based development framework, scalability, flexibility and extensibility.
AEM has been announced on the Linux Kernel Mailing List (LKML) and received feedback that resulted in some changes to the design and implementation.
AEM is not yet integrated with the Linux kernel.
More information on AEM is available from [7].
Today's telecommunication environments are increasingly adopting clustered servers to gain benefits in performance, availability, and scalability.
The resulting benefits of a cluster are greater or more cost-efficient than what a single server can provide.
Furthermore, the telecommunication industry's interest in clustering originates from the fact that clusters ad-dress carrierclass characteristics such as guaranteed service availability, reliability and scaled performance, using costeffective hardware and software.
Without being absolute about these requirements, they can be divided in these three categories: short failure detection and failure recovery, guaranteed availability of service, and short response times.
The most widely adopted clustering technique is use of multiple interconnected loosely coupled nodes to a single highly available system.
One missing feature from Linux in this area is a reliable and efficient inter-process and inter-processor communication protocol.
However, there exist an Open Source project, Trans-parent Inter Process Communication (TIPC) protocol, which is specially designed for efficient intra cluster communication, leveraging the particular conditions present within loosely coupled clusters.
It runs on Linux and is provided as a portable source code package implementing a loadable kernel module.
TIPC is unique from the perspective that there seems to be no other protocol providing a comparable combination of versatility and performance.
The functional addressing scheme is an original innovation, as is the topology subscription services and its "reactive connection" concept.
TIPC is a useful toolbox for anyone wanting to develop or use Carrier Grade or Highly Available clusters on Linux.
It provides the necessary infrastructure for cluster, network and software management functionality, as well as a good support for designing site-independent, scalable, distributed, highavailability and high-performance applications.
Some of the most important TIPC features include full location transparency, lightweight connections, reliable multicast, signaling link protocol, topology subscription services and more.
TIPC is a contribution from Ericsson to Open Source.
It will be announced to LKML in mind-May 2004, two weeks after I submit the paper the USENIX.
However, more recent news regarding TIPC will be included in the USENIX presentation.
TIPC is licensed under a dual GPL and BSD license.
More information on TIPC is available from [6] [11].
Linux has generally been considered immune to the spread of viruses, backdoors and Trojan programs on the Internet.
However, with the increasing popularity of Linux as a desktop platform, the risk of seeing viruses or Trojans developed for this platform are rapidly growing.
To alleviate this problem, the system should prevent on run time the execution of untrusted software.
One solution is to digitally sign the trusted binaries and have the system check the digital signature of binaries before running them.
Therefore, untrusted (not signed) binaries are denied the execution.
This can improve the security of the system by avoiding a wide range of malicious binaries like viruses, worms, Torjan programs and backdoors from running on the system.
DigSig Linux kernel module checks the signature of a binary before running it [9] [12].
It inserts digital signatures inside the ELF binary and verifies this signature before loading the binary.
It is based on the Linux Security Module hooks (main stream Linux kernel from 2.5.X and higher).
Typically, in this approach, vendors do not sign binaries; the control of the system remains with the local administrator.
S/he is responsible to sign all binaries s/he trusts with his/her private key.
Therefore, DigSig guarantees two things: (1) if you signed a binary, nobody else than you can modify that binary without being detected, and (2) nobody can run a binary which is not signed or badly signed.
There have already been several initiatives in this domain, such as Tripwire, BSign, Cryptomark [14][15] [16].
We believe the DigSig project is the first to be both easily accessible to all (available on SourceForge, under the GPL license), and it operates at kernel level on run time.
The run time is very important for CGL as this takes into account the high availability aspects of the system.
The DigSig approach has been to use the existing solutions like GPG [13] and BSign [15] (a Debian package) rather than reinventing the wheel.
However, in order to reduce the overhead in the kernel, the DigSig project only took the minimum code necessary from GPG.
This helped much to reduce the amount of code imported to the kernel in source code of the original (only 1/10 of the original GnuPG 1.2.2 source code has been imported to the kernel module).
There are many challenges accompanying the migration from proprietary to open platforms.
The main challenge remains to be the availability of the various kernel features and mechanisms needed for telecom platforms and integrating these features in the Linux kernel.
Carrier Grade Linux is a cooperative initiative aiming to advance the Linux in the communications space and provide an alternative away from proprietary carrier grade operating systems.
The participation in OSDL CGL is open to everyone.
For more information, please visit the OSDL web site.
