Introduction Both health information technology (HIT) and the payment card industry (PCI) involve the exchange and management of sensitive, protected information.
Compared to the PCI, HIT could consider protected health information (PHI) more sensitive than PCI cardholder data.
If cardholder data is breached in the PCI, payment card companies may then remove fraudulent charges from the customer's account and/or issue the customer a new payment card.
However, once a person's PHI has been breached, the PHI has been breached forever.
Healthcare organizations cannot issue new health histories or new identities to affected individuals.
Secure logging and auditing may deter users from performing unauthorized transactions with PHI since an irrefutable trace of the user's activity is recorded.
Logging and auditing also provides an accounting of PHI disclosures for assisting data breach investigations.
Secure logging and auditing is one mechanism EHR systems should implement to promote security, user accountability, and trust.
The objective of this paper is to raise awareness of issues around electronic health record logging and auditing mechanisms through a comparison with the Payment Card Industry Data Security Standards.
With the recent push to move all health records to electronic format, the healthcare industry needs to define better standards for secure logging and auditing in EHR systems.
Since security and protection of PHI should be just as strong, if not stronger, than PCI data security, we extract ten secure logging and auditing concepts addressed by the PCI Data Security Standard (DSS).
Table 1 summarizes our comparison of PCI DSS versus HIPAA, Meaningful Use Stage 1, and Meaningful Use Stage 2.
Overall, the PCI DSS provide more detailed requirements for secure auditing and logging than the HIT criteria and standards.
For example, PCI DSS Requirement 10.2 lists seven specific user events that should be logged [2], including:  All individual accesses to cardholder data;  All actions taken by any individual with root or administrative privileges;  Access to all audit trails; and  Initialization of the audit logs In comparison, Meaningful Use Stage 1 requires log entries when "electronic health information is created, modified, accessed, or deleted" [3].
Likewise, Meaningful Use Stage 2 requires log entries "when EHR technology is used to record, create, change, access, or delete electronic health information" [4].
The PCI DSS defines auditable events more specifically than current HIT criteria and standards, especially since it considers security event logging (such as logging access to all audit trails, or logging the granting, modification, and revocation of user privileges).
HIT could greatly improve guidelines for auditable events by incorporating security event logging into the criteria and standards.
Suppose a doctor accesses a patient record and creates a new prescription for the patient.
Under Meaningful Use, these two events would be logged appropriately.
However, suppose the doctor conspires with an administrator of the EHR.
The administrator provides the doctor with the new privilege to create prescriptions for himself or a neighbor.
In this case, the PHI access and prescription creation would be logged, but the unauthorized addition of privileges for the doctor would not be logged.
Security event logging is necessary to capture trails of unauthorized activity behind-the-scenes, in addition to user transactions with PHI.
Even though an EHR may have access control mechanisms in-place, users may still abuse or manipulate these controls to perform unauthorized actions.
Adequate secure logging would record these unauthorized actions.Other key observations of the comparison between HIPAA, Meaningful Use (MU), and PCI DSS include:  A gradual increase in acknowledgement of the scope of secure logging and auditing requirements from MU Stage 1 to Stage 2,  The proposed addition of a standard for timestamp synchronization and reliability in MU Stage 2, since the key purpose of audit trails is to record user activity over time,  Omission of log backup requirements in HIPAA and MU to ensure protection of audit logs in the event of hardware failure,  Omission of log retention requirements in MU,  Omission of incident response requirements in MU for documenting and reacting to noncompliance issues found through auditing log entries, and  Omission of log disposal policies in MU to securely destroy log entries no longer needed for business or regulatory purposes.
Secure logging and auditing standards in HIT currently lag behind standards in the PCI.
Even though secure logging and auditing practices in HIT are currently evolving, additional research into the PCI may provide insight into secure logging and auditing standards that work well, standards that do not adequately address intended security objectives, and standards that may need further clarification to conform to HIT practices.
HIT needs to catch up with the PCI and surpass the PCI in terms of securing and protecting PHI.
