File system management applications, such as data scrubbers, defragmentation tools, resizing tools, and partition editors, are essential for maintaining, optimizing, and administering storage systems.
These applications require fine-grained control over file-system metadata and data, such as the ability to migrate a data block to another physical location.
Such control is not available with the VFS API, and so these applications bypass the VFS and access and modify file-system meta-data directly.
As a result, these applications do not work across file systems, and must be developed from scratch for each file system, which involves significant engineering effort and impedes adoption of new file systems.
Our goal is to design an interface that allows these management applications to be written once and be usable for all file systems that support the interface.
Our key insight is that these applications operate on common file system abstractions, such as file system objects (e.g., blocks, inodes, and directory entries), and the mappings from logical blocks of a file to their physical locations.
We propose the Extended Virtual File System (eVFS) interface that provides fine-grained access to these abstractions , allowing the development of generic file system management applications.
We demonstrate the benefits of our approach by building a file-system agnostic conversion tool that performs in-place conversion of a source file system to a completely different destination file system , showing that arbitrary modifications to the file system format can be handled by the interface.
File system management applications help with maintaining, optimizing, and administering file systems.
Examples of such applications include file system upgrade tools, defragmentation tools, and file system resizing tools.
Unlike typical applications that are file-system agnostic because they use the virtual file-system interface (VFS) to access their data, the management applications perform low-level allocation, mapping, and placement of physical blocks in a file system.
These operations are not exposed by the VFS API, and thus these applications must bypass the VFS, and access the file system metadata directly.As a result, file system developers and experts must write these applications from scratch for each file system, because they are tightly coupled with the format of the file system.
For example, a defragmentation tool for Ext4 cannot be reused for Btrfs, not even in parts, because the two file systems use different formats for block allocation and free space management.
The effort required for building these applications is significant, and thus newer file systems such as F2FS [7] and BetrFS [6] lack a rich set of management tools, which stymies their adoption and hinders innovation in file system technology.The goal of our work is to simplify the development of file system management applications.
The VFS interface has been highly successful because it abstracts the key objects (e.g., files and directories) and operations (e.g., create, delete, read, write) that are provided by any file system.
Our approach is to provide a new abstraction, similar to VFS, that enables file system management applications to be written in a generic, file-system agnostic manner.
Ideally, the applications are developed once using this interface and they work for file systems that implement this interface.
This relieves file system developers from the onus of building these essential (but often neglected) applications, and instead they can focus their effort on improving the file system itself.We introduce the Extended Virtual File System (eVFS) interface, which provides a fine-grained abstraction for manipulating the file system.
The key insight of eVFS is that the management applications operate on common abstractions that are shared across file systems, such as the allocation of file system objects (e.g., blocks or extents, inodes, and directory entries) and the mappings from logical blocks of a file to physical blocks.
By exposing these abstractions, the eVFS API enables building applications that work across file systems.
For example, a defragmentation tool needs to find the fragmented blocks of a file and relocate them to a contiguous extent.
It can do so by invoking generic eVFS operations for allocating physical extents and mapping them to logical extents.The eVFS API does not change the file system's trust model.
Management applications are already trusted to operate directly on metadata without the VFS, and bugs in them may cause file system inconsistency or corruption [2,5].
Hence, exposing these operations through eVFS may improve the robustness of management applications, since the file-system specific implementation of the interface can be provided once by file system experts.
open the file system with parameters specified by mnt struct evfs_txn * txn_begin(struct evfs * evfs) start a new transaction and return the associated handle int txn_commit(struct evfs_txn * txn) commit the transaction txn int txn_abort(struct evfs_txn * txn) abort the transaction txn int super_make(struct evfs_super * sup) make new a file system with parameters specified by sup s64 extent_alloc(u64 addr, u64 len) allocate the extent defined by {addr, len} long extent_free(long addr, long len) free the extent defined by {addr, len} s64 extent_reverse(u64 addr, u64 len, struct evfs_reverse * rv)fills rv with the inode number and logical offset of all inodes that map to the extent defined by {addr, len} int extent_active(u64 addr, u64 len) return 1 if extent defined by {addr, len} is active, else 0 s64 extent_iterate(s64 ino_nr, void * priv, s64 (* cb)(u64 log_blk_nr, u64 phy_blk_nr, u64 len, void * priv))iterate through all extents mapped to inode ino_nr in the form of {log_blk_nr, len} → {phy_blk_nr, len} and process them via callback function cb s64 freesp_iterate(void * priv, s64 (* cb)( u64 addr, u64 len, void * priv))iterate through all free space extents in the file system and process them via callback function cb s64 inode_alloc(s64 ino_nr, struct evfs_inode * i) allocate the inode ino_nr with the inode structure i long inode_free(long ino_nr) free the inode ino_nr s64 inode_read(s64 ino_nr, s64 ofs, char * data, u64 len)read len byte of data to data from the inode ino_nr at logical offset ofs int inode_map(u64 ino_nr, u64 log_blk_nr, u64 phy_blk_nr, u64 len) map physical extent {phy_blk_nr, len} to the logical extent {log_blk_nr, len} for inode ino_nr s64 inode_iterate(void * priv, s64 (* cb)( s64 ino_nr, struct evfs_inode * i, void * priv))iterate through all active inodes in the file system and process them via callback function cbint dirent_add(s64 dir_nr, struct evfs_dirent * d) add a new entry d to directory inode dir_nr s64 dirent_iterate(s64 dir_nr, void * priv, s64 (* cb)(struct evfs_dirent * d, void * priv))iterate through all directory entries for inode dir_nr and process them via callback function cb Table 1: eVFS API.
All functions after the first four take an additional struct evfs_txn parameter which is not shown.Eventually, our aim is to expose these operations for online use without affecting existing file system applications that are unaware of management applications or the eVFS API.
To do so, the eVFS API provides a transactional interface for eVFS operations.
Currently, however, we have only explored offline use, where the transactional support provides crash consistency, which is often missing in management applications [4].
As a proof of concept, we have built an offline file system conversion tool using the eVFS interface.
This tool performs crash-consistent, in-place conversion of one file system to another entirely different file system.
It can thus also be used to modify the file-system specific options of the file system, such as the file system size, or upgrade a file system.
The application is generic, and thus supporting additional file systems should require no modifications to the application.
This experience suggests that the eVFS API will allow building a variety of generic, file system management applications.
The goal of designing the eVFS interface is to enable filesystem agnostic management applications.
As such, the interface must be generic while providing fine-grained control over the allocation of file system objects, and mappings from one object to another (e.g. directory entries to files, files to blocks).
Therefore, we must define the various objects that are generic across file systems.At a high level, file systems manage four types of objects: files or directories, blocks or extents, directory entries, and file-system wide settings (such as the block size, file system size, or label).
Thus, we provide an interface for managing each of the objects, and any mappings between them.
In this section, we motivate the eVFS design by describing use cases for accessing and manipulating these objects, including the need for transactional support.Inodes In the eVFS interface, similar to VFS, every file system object, such as a file or directory, is uniquely identified by an inode number and structure.
File system management applications frequently need to read, create or update inode structures and their mappings to physical blocks.
For example, a defragmentation tool needs to scatter-gather fragmented blocks of a file into a new contiguous extent, which involves updating the logical to physical block mappings of an inode.
The eVFS interface thus provides support for allocating and updating an inode.
The inode allocation interface is finer-grained than VFS file creation, since it does not allocate a directory entry or file blocks.
The eVFS interface also allows mapping and unmapping logical offsets of a file to specific physical blocks, providing precise control over these mappings.
Blocks and Extents Many management applications require fine-grained control over the physical layout of a file on disk.
For example, an in-place file system conversion tool needs to recreate files on the destination file system that directly map to existing data blocks belonging to the same files on the source file system, while avoiding copying blocks as much as possible (see Section 3.1 for more detail).
Thus, the interface allows allocation of blocks and extents at specific physical addresses.To allocate blocks and extents, applications need to know the locations and sizes of free spaces.
Maintenance applications also require knowledge of the remaining free space in the file system to determine whether to start garbage collection.
This information must be obtained by processing block allocation metadata and is thus a file-system specific operation.
However, with eVFS, we abstract away the file-system specific details and provide a function that enables applications to iterate through all free space extents in a file system, without needing to know the format of the file system.
The API also allows applications to find the nearest available free extent, or to check whether an extent is currently in use.For file systems that support copy-on-write semantics and snapshots, management applications can make informed decisions based on whether an extent is private to a file or shared by multiple files.
For example, it is easier to relocate private extents during garbage collection.
To enable such logic, the interface supports retrieving a reverse mapping that lists the inodes and their logical offsets that map to a particular extent.
A defragmentation tool can utilize this information to move an extent by remapping all inodes that reference the extent to its new location.
Directory Entries File systems use directory entries to support mapping name(s) to an inode.
Consider our in-place file system conversion tool that needs to recreate directories.
It must iterate through the entries in the source file system while making copies to the destination file system.
Therefore, the interface supports adding, updating, or removing individual directory entries, as well as iterating through the entries of a directory inode.
File-System Wide Settings A file system stores various parameters and options that describe the file system format and the features that are supported.
Some of these parameters are common across different file systems, such as the total size of the file system, block size, etc.
Therefore, they can be exposed to support management applications that modify the layout or format of the file system (e.g., updating file system to a newer version, changing the block size of an existing file system).
The eVFS interface provides generic support for managing file-system wide settings in two ways.
First, it allows updating simple settings such as labels or file system feature flags that do not require restructuring the file system, similar to the functionality provided by tune2fs [13] for the Ext3/Ext4 file systems.
Second, to support generic restructuring, the interface provides support for creating an empty file system, that performs the same task as mkfs.
As described later in more detail, this interface allows our in-place file system conversion tool to reformat the device to the destination file system while keeping the file contents of the existing file system intact.
Similarly, a file system can be resized using this approach, although less efficiently than a custom file-system specific resizing tool.
Transactions Since many of the operations supported by the interface make the file system temporarily inconsistent, the interface also provides transactional support to ensure atomicity so that other applications do not see partial updates made by management applications.
Transactional support is also necessary for providing crash consistency, which is often missing in management applications [4].
Thus, eVFS also enables building robust management applications that are resilient to power failures.
In this section, we present our prototype of the eVFS API and discuss our implementation of the API.
Next, we describe the in-place file system conversion tool that we have built using the eVFS interface.
Table 1 shows a partial set of functions in the eVFS API.
These functions provide fine-grained control by allowing extents, inodes, and directory entries, to be individually manipulated.
We chose to use extent-based representation for storage space since it generally requires less metadata than the corresponding block-based representation, and is thus preferred by modern file systems.
An application is expected to start a transaction before issuing most eVFS operations.We have implemented a subset of the eVFS API for two file systems, the extent-based Ext4 file system, and the log-structured F2FS file system, which enables converting an Ext4 file system to an F2FS file system.
Our current implementation only works for offline use, i.e., the application has exclusive access to the unmounted file system.
The file-system specific implementation of the API uses the Spiffy framework [12] that provides robust parsing and serialization libraries, helping avoid bugs while handling file system metadata.We are currently working on supporting other deployed VFS-based file systems, such as Btrfs and XFS.
Since our API is generic, we believe it should be possible to extend it for non-VFS file systems as well.
Converting an existing file system to a different file system is a tedious and time-consuming process that normally involves copying the full content of a file system to another disk, reformatting the disk, and then copying everything back to the new file system.
In contrast, an in-place file system conversion only updates file system metadata, and does not move any regular file data unless its location must be used by statically allocated metadata of the destination file system.
This technique can speed up the conversion dramatically.
While some such conversion tools exist, they are hard to implement correctly 1 and not generally available.We have designed and implemented a crashconsistent, in-place file system conversion tool using the eVFS interface.
The conversion tool uses user-level, block-based redo journaling for ensuring crash consistency.
Unlike typical journals that have a fixed size (e.g., the Ext4 journal), the journal is dynamically allocated from blocks that are currently free in both the source and the destination file systems, which ensures that both abort and redo recovery are possible since these blocks are not in use by either file system.
The free space information is obtained by using the eVFS API.
The dynamic allocation of blocks also allows converting heavily fragmented file systems, and maximizing utilization of the free space for the journal.As an optimization, when a destination file system block is written to free space in the source file system, the block is written directly without being journaled.
By journaling the rest of the blocks that will overwrite the source file system, we ensure crash consistency.A complication occurs when a block that is currently in use by the journal is allocated to the destination file system.
Allocating this block would cause the journal to be overwritten during checkpointing.
In this case, the conflicting journal block is remapped to a different free block, and then this freed block can be updated directly.If the journaling layer runs out of free space, the conversion process is aborted.
We guarantee that this error occurs before the transaction commits, so no data is lost on a conversion failure.An additional benefit of journaling is that the conversion tool can handle large file systems since the source file system metadata can be read while the destination file system metadata is being written.
In contrast, without journaling, all source file system metadata would need to be read into memory before starting conversion, or else the source metadata could be overwritten.The conversion tool starts a new transaction and then creates an empty destination file system on the device 1 E.g. the convertfs utility [14] requires sparse file support on the source file system and performs full data copying Application Application Generic 504 Generic 224 Ext4 218 Ext4 - F2FS 1780 F2FS - Libraries Libraries Generic 2250 Generic 2625 Journaling - Journaling 1350 Ext4 - Ext4 666 F2FS - F2FS 2152 Table 2: Lines of code for the Spiffy and the eVFS filesystem conversion tools.
storing the source file system.
Next, it iterates through the inodes of the source file system and creates the corresponding inodes in the destination file system.
For regular files, it iterates through each extent in the source inode, allocating the corresponding extent in the destination file system, and then copying over the mappings to the destination inode.
For each extent, we check whether it overlaps with block(s) that are allocated in the destination file system.
If so, we relocate the extent to free space in the destination file system, and update the inode that maps to this extent.
For directories, we iterate through the entries to recreate them in the destination file system.
Finally, we commit the transaction and allow checkpointing to create the destination file system.
The commit information needs to be placed in a well-known location that is not in use by either file system.
Currently, we use the boot record to store this information.
Some source file systems may inline data inside metadata (e.g., Ext4's fast symlink) or perform subblock allocation (e.g., ReiserFS's tail packing).
In these cases, the conversion tool will need to copy the data using the eVFS read/write interface since the data is not mapped to an extent.
When converting to a file system that lacks the feature of the source file system, some information may be lost.
For example, converting a file system with immutable snapshots to Ext4 will result in a copy of the snapshots being created, since Ext4 does not support snapshots.
In this section, we evaluate the programming effort needed to build the in-place file system conversion tool, and the performance cost of adding journaling to the conversion tool.
Evaluation comparing copy-based conversion versus the in-place conversion tool can be found in our previous work [12].
Table 2 shows the programming effort for building the file-system conversion tool using the Spiffy framework [12] (Spiffy converter) and the eVFS interface (eVFS converter).
Both the converters use the same logic, but the Spiffy converter's application code uses 2502 lines, which includes almost 2000 lines of file-system specific code, and it can only convert from Ext4 to F2FS.
The eVFS converter uses 224 lines of generic file-system conversion code, less than 10% of the Spiffy converter, and could be used to convert between any pair of file systems that implement the eVFS API.
The libraries used by both applications provide generic code (e.g., bitmaps, hash tables, etc.) for supporting management applications.
The file-system specific code used by the eVFS converter is part of the eVFS library and can be used by other management applications.
Unlike the Spiffy converter, the eVFS converter is crashconsistent, requiring 1350 lines of journaling code.
Journaling Performance We compare the time it takes to run the conversion tool with and without journaling.
We created a 128GB Ext4 partition with 20000 files that use a total of 64GB.
On average, it took 13.68 seconds to complete the conversion with journaling, and 11.41 seconds without journaling.
We believe a 20% overhead is an acceptable trade-off for crash consistency.
We had previously built a file system conversion tool using the Spiffy framework [12].
Spiffy uses an annotation language to enable complete specification of the file system format and then generates a robust library for parsing and serializing the file system data structures.
However, Spiffy only helps identify the types of these structures, and not their semantics, and thus still requires significant file-system specific code.
In contrast, the eVFS interface is generic across file systems.
In this work, we use Spiffy for the file-system specific implementation of the eVFS API, thus ensuring a robust implementation.There are several libraries for accessing and manipulating file systems, such as libext2fs [13] and libfsntfs that comes with ntfsprogs [8].
While most of the functions provided by these libraries are filesystem specific, some are generic across file systems, such as iterating through all inodes in the file system, which we have adapted for the eVFS interface.The DeviceIoControl function in the Win32 API supports control codes that enable fine-grained changes to the file system and its resources.
For example, FSCTL_MOVE_FILE allows for atomic remapping of a file's blocks [3].
The Win32 file and volume management API ensures that each operation results in a consistent file system state.
In contrast, eVFS operations can cause resource leaks or inconsistency when used incorrectly.
However, eVFS enables more powerful management applications, such as the conversion tool.Many existing works extended storage interfaces to simplify writing file systems, while improving their reliability [10], security, functionality [9], or performance [15,1].
Our work is similar in spirit to these works in that we have extended the file system interface to reduce the effort of building file system management applications.
However, instead of pushing the decision making down to the lower layer, we instead expose previously internal operations in the file system, thus enabling applications that require more fine-grained control over the file system.
While our approach helps with building generic management applications, these applications will need to specifically handle file systems that support subsets of the eVFS API.
For example, in-place update file systems, such as Ext4, generally do not track the reverse mapping from extents to inodes, and so cannot implement this API call efficiently.
As a result, certain applications will either not be able to support these file systems, or will require different logic for such file systems.Our API is designed to provide control over extents, but these extents may be mapped to a non-linear physical address space.
For example, modern file systems such as Btrfs and ZFS incorporate volume management and RAID-style redundancy within the file system, and thus the extents may map to physically discontiguous chunks of physical storage.
Since some management applications may need control over these physical chunks as well, we plan to explore the feasibility of generically exposing this address space.Our current eVFS implementation is designed for offline applications, and provides crash consistency support.
For online applications, we plan to provide transactional support for eVFS operations without making major changes to existing file systems (i.e., we do not wish to convert them into transactional file systems, which would add significant complexity to the entire kernel [11]).
Currently, we are exploring methods that reuse the file system's locking protocols to ensure that eVFS operations can be committed atomically while ensuring that existing applications cannot observe inconsistent file system states.
The eVFS interface exposes a new, low-level file system abstraction that enables control over allocation and modification of file system objects and the mappings between them.
These operations are necessary for building generic file system management applications that make fine-grained updates to file system metadata.
We showed the feasibility of our approach by building a file system conversion tool.
The application requires no changes to support a file system that implements the eVFS interface.
We believe eVFS will enable exciting new applications and reduce the programming effort for building them.
