This paper presents the results of the 1st workshop on Asian translation (WMT2014) shared tasks, which included J↔E translation subtasks and J↔C translation subtasks.
As the first year of WAT, 12 institutions participated to the shared tasks.
More than 300 translation results have been submitted to the automatic evaluation server, and selected submissions were manually evaluated.
The Workshop on Asian Translation (WAT) is a new open evaluation campaign focusing on Asian languages.
We would like to invite a broad range of participants and conduct various forms of machine translation experiments and evaluation.
Collecting and sharing our knowledge will allow us to understand the essence of machine translation and the problems to be solved.
We are working toward the practical use of machine translation among all Asian countries.For the 1st WAT, we chose scientific papers as the targeted domain, and selected the languages Japanese, Chinese and English.What makes WAT unique:• Open innovation platformThe test data is fixed and open, so you can repeat evaluations on the same data and confirm changes in translation accuracy over time.
WAT has no deadline for the automatic translation quality evaluation (continuous evaluation), so you can submit translation results at any time.
• scientific papers as a domain and JapaneseChinese as a language pair.
In the future, we will add more Asian languages, such as Korean, Vietnamese, Indonesian, Thai, Myanmar and so on.
• Evaluation method Evaluation will be done by both automatic and human evaluation.
For human evaluation, WAT will use crowdsourcing, which is low cost and allows multiple evaluations.
WAT uses Asian Scientific Paper Excerpt Corpus (ASPEC) 1 as the dataset.
ASPEC is constructed by the Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST) in collaboration with the National Institute of Information and Communications Technology (NICT).
It consists of a Japanese-English scientific paper abstract corpus (ASPEC-JE), which is used for J↔E subtasks, and a Japanese-Chinese scientific paper excerpt corpus (ASPEC-JC), which is used for J↔C subtasks.
The statistics of each corpus are described in Table1.
The training data of ASPEC-JE was constructed by the NICT from approximately 2 million Japanese-English scientific paper abstracts owned by the JST.
Because the paper abstracts are kind 1 http://lotus.kuee.kyoto-u.ac.jp/ASPEC/ Human evaluations were conducted as pairwise comparisons between the translation results for a specific baseline system and translation results for each participant's system.
That is, the specific baseline system was the standard of human evaluation.
A phrase-based statistical machine translation (SMT) system was adopted as the specific 2 http://opac.jst.go.jp/bunrui/index.html baseline system at WAT 2014.
In addition to the results for the baseline phrasebased SMT system, we produced results for the baseline systems that consisted of a hierarchical phrase-based SMT system, a string-to-tree syntaxbased SMT system, a tree-to-string syntax-based SMT system, five commercial rule-based machine translation (RBMT) systems, and two online translation systems.
The SMT baseline systems consisted of publicly available software, and the procedures for building the systems and translating using the systems were published on the WAT 2014 web page 3 .
We used Moses ( Koehn et al., 2007;Hoang et al., 2009) as the implementation of the baseline SMT systems.
The Berkeley parser ( Petrov et al., 2006) was used to obtain syntactic annotations.
The baseline systems are shown in Table 2.
The commercial RBMT systems and the online translation systems were operated by the organizers.
We note that these RBMT companies and online translation companies did not submit themselves.
Since our objective is not to compare commercial RBMT systems or online translation systems from companies that did not themselves participate, the system description of these systems are anonymized in this paper.We describe the detail of the baseline SMT systems.
We used the following data for the training of the SMT baseline systems.
• Training data for the language model: All of the target language sentences in the parallel corpus.
• Training data for the translation model: Sentences that were 40 words or less in length.
(For Japanese-English training data, we only used train-1.txt, which consisted of 1 million parallel sentence pairs with high similarity scores.)
• Development data for tuning: All of the development data.
We used the following tools for tokenization.
• Juman version 7.0 4 for Japanese segmentation.
To obtain word alignments, GIZA++ and growdiag-final-and heuristics were used.
We used 5-gram language models with modified Kneser-Ney smoothing, which were built using a tool in the Moses toolkit (Heafield et al., 2013).
We used the following Moses' configuration for the phrase-based SMT system.
• distortion-limit = 20 • msd-bidirectional-fe lexicalized reordering • Phrase score option: GoodTuringThe default values were used for the other system parameters.
We used the following Moses' configuration for the hierarchical phrase-based SMT system.
• max-chart-span = 1000 • Phrase score option: GoodTuringThe default values were used for the other system parameters.
We used Berkeley parser to obtain target language syntax.
We used the following Moses' configuration for the string-to-tree syntax-based SMT system.
• max-chart-span = 1000 • Phrase score option: GoodTuring The default values were used for the other system parameters.
We used Berkeley parser to obtain source language syntax.
We used the following Moses' configuration for the baseline tree-to-string syntax-based SMT system.
• max-chart-span = 1000 • Phrase score option: GoodTuring • Phrase extraction options: MaxSpan = 1000, MinHoleSource = 1, MinWords = 0, NonTermConsecSource, and AllowOnlyUnalignedWords.The default values were used for the other system parameters.
We calculated automatic evaluation scores of the translation results applying two popular metrics: BLEU ( Papineni et al., 2002) and RIBES ( Isozaki et al., 2010).
BLEU scores were calculated with multi-bleu.
perl distributed with the Moses toolkit ( Koehn et al., 2007).
RIBES scores were calculated with RIBES.py version 1.02.4 6 .
All scores of each task were calculated using one reference.
Before the calculation of the automatic evaluation scores, the translation results have been tokenized with word segmentation tools on each language.For Japanese segmentation we use three different tools, which are Juman version 7.0 ( Kurohashi et al., 1994), KyTea 0.4.6 (Neubig et al., 2011) with Full SVM model 7 and MeCab 0.996 ( Kudo, 2005) with IPA dictionary 2.7.0 8 .
For Chinese segmentation we use two different tools, which are KyTea 0.4.6 with Full SVM Model in MSR model and Stanford Word Segmenter version 2014-06-16 with Chinese Penn Treebank (CTB) and Peking University (PKU) model 9 ( Tseng, 2005).
For English segmentation we use tokenizer.perl 10 in the Moses toolkit.The detailed procedures for the automatic evaluation are shown at WAT2014 evaluation web page 11 .
The participants submit the translation results via an automatic evaluation system deployed at WAT2014 web page, which give them automatic evaluation scores of the results they upload.
Fig- ure 1 shows the submitting interface for participants.
The system requires the participants to provide the following information when they upload the translation results:• Subtask (J ↔ E, J ↔ C)• Method (SMT, RBMT, SMT and RBMT, • Existence of the use of other resources in addition to ASPEC• Permission of publishing the automatic evaluation scores on WAT2014 web pageThe server of the system keeps all submitted information including translation results or scores and participants can confirm the only information they uploaded.
The information of translation results which the participant permits to publish is disclosed on the web page.
In addition to submitting the translation results for automatic evaluation, participants submit the results for human evaluation with the same web interface.
This automatic evaluation system will be available even 7 5 Human Evaluation As all the MT researchers know, the human evaluation costs a lot of time and money.
One of the solutions to reduce them is using crowdsourcing.Other machine translation evaluation campaigns such as IWSLT (2011,2012) and WMT (2012,2013) also used crowdsourcing for the human evaluation.
Recently, there are so many crowdsourcing services in the world: Amazon Mechanical Turk 13 , CrowdFlower 14 , Yahoo Crowdsourcing 15 , Lancers 16 and so on.
Among these services, we used Lancers for the human evaluation of WAT2014.There are two reasons of choosing Lancers.
One is that we can set the category of the crowdsourcing task ('Translation' for this case).
We can reach the appropriate workers by setting the appropriate categories.
The other reason is that we can ask the task to the identity-verified workers.
This function guarantee the quality of the workers.
These two advantages can keep the evaluation quality at higher level.
For the human evaluation, we randomly chose documents from the Test set of ASPEC data, in total 400 sentence pairs for JE and JC.
We excluded the documents which contains a sentence with longer than 100 Japanese characters.
Each submission is compared with the baseline translation (Phrase-based SMT, described in Section 3) and given HUMAN score.
We conducted pairwise evaluation of each test sentence of the 400 sentences.
The input sentence and two translations (the baseline and a submission) are shown to the workers, and the workers are asked to judge which translation is better than the other, or they are of the same quality.
The order of the two translations are at random.
Figure 2 shows the illustration of the evaluation.
Table 3: The combinations of human judgements and the final decision of each sentence pairs from system A and B.
The crowdsourcing workers are not specialists, thus the quality of the judgements are not necessarily precise.
To guarantee the quality of the evaluation, each sentence is evaluated by 3 different workers and the final decision is made by the voting of the judgements.
Table 3 shows all the combinations of the worker judgements and the final decision.
Suppose W to be the number of wins compared to the baseline, L to be the number of losses and T to be the number of ties, the HUMAN score, which is the official human evaluation score of WAT2014, can be calculated by the following formula:HU M AN = 100 × W − L W + L + TFrom the definition, the HUMAN score ranges between -100 and 100.
As there are several ways to estimate the confidence interval, we chose the bootstrap resampling (Koehn, 2004) to estimated 95% confidence interval.
The procedure is as follows:1.
randomly select 300 sentences from the 400 human evaluation sentences, and calculate the HUMAN score on the selected sentences 2.
iterate the previous step 1000 times and get 1000 HUMAN scores 3.
sort the 1000 scores and estimate the 95% confidence interval by discarding top and bottom 25 scores One big benefit of using crowdsourcing is that we can reduce the cost of evaluations.
In WAT2014, one judgement costs 5 JPY.
The evaluation of a submission requires 3 (judgements) × 400 (sentence pairs) = 1,200 judgements and it costs 5 × 1,200 = 6,000 JPY.
The time for the evaluation differs depending on the translation direction.
On the average, one evaluation finished in a couple of days.
Table 4 shows the list of participants to WAT2014.
There are not only the Japanese organizations, but some organizations came from outside Japan.
12 teams submitted one or more translation results to the automatic evaluation server, and 11 teams submitted one or more translation results to the human evaluation.
In this section, the evaluation results of WAT2014 are reported from several perspectives.
Parts of the results of both automatic and human evaluations are also accessible at WAT2014 website 17 .
Figure 3 shows the official automatic evaluation results of the representative submissions and baseline systems.
The automatic evaluation results of all the submissions are shown in Section Appendix A. Figure 4 shows the official human evaluation results.
The error bars in the figures show the 95% confidence interval (see Section 5.2.4).
Note that overlapping the error bars between two submissions does not necessarily mean that there is no significant difference.
If an error bar crosses the x-axis (HUMAN score = 0), it means that there is no significant difference between the submission and the baseline (SMT Phrase).
From the results, the followings can be observed:• The best SMT system achieved better quality than RBMT system.
• The translation quality of the widely used systems was Phrase-based SMT < Hierarchical PBSMT < Syntax-based SMT (S2T and T2S).
• Forest-to-String Syntax-based SMT system (Neubig, 2014) achieved the best quality for all the translation directions.
Tables 5, 6, 7 and 8 show the results of statistical significance testings of JE, EJ, JC and CJ translations respectively where all the pairs of submissions are tested.
≫, ≫ and > mean that the system in the row is better than the system in the column by p < 0.
01 To assess the reliability of agreement between the crowdsourcing workers, we calculated the Fleiss' kappa ( Fleiss and others, 1971) values.
The results are shown in Table 9.
We can see that the Kappa values are larger for X → J translations than J → X translations.
This may be because we used Japanese crowdsourcing service for the evaluation and the majority of the crowdsourcing workers are Japanese.
The MT evaluation of their mother tongue is much easier than the others in general.
Looking at evaluation results of WEBLIO-EJ1 1 and 2 submissions (see Table 12), the automatic and human evaluations are inconsistent: the WEBLIO-EJ1 2 is consistently better than WEBLIO-EJ1 1 in the automatic evaluation, however it is much worse in the human evaluation.
According to the descriptions of the two submissions, the difference of the two is whether it uses the forest input or not.
It is natural that using the forest input improves the translation quality, thus we conducted the human evaluation of WEBLIO-EJ1 2 compared to WEBLIO-EJ1 1, which means we used WEBLIO-EJ1 1 as the baseline for the human evaluation.
The HUMAN score was 2.50 ± 4.17 which means there is no significant difference between the two, and this result is far from the results of the official results.
Actually, taking the confidence intervals into consideration, this conclusion can be derived under some probability.The Fleiss' kappa value was 0.528 and it is much higher than the other E→J human evaluations.
This may be because the outputs of the two systems are quite similar and it is very easy for the Table 10: The changes of correlations (R 2 ) before and after removing RBMT and online systems.7 non-removal removal JEworkers to judge which translation is better.
If two translations have both better and worse parts than the other, the workers would evaluate differently from person to person.
Table 10.
The correlation becomes much better after removing the RBMT and online systems for all the translation directions other than J→C.
The number of published automatic evaluaition results of 12 teams exceeded 100 by the day of WAT2014 workshop and 37 translation results for human evaluation was submitted by 11 teams.
We will organize the all submitted data for human evaluation and make it public.
This paper summarized the WAT2014 machine translation evaluation campaing.
We had 12 participants worldwide, and collected a large number of submissions which are useful to improve the current machine translation systems by analyzing the submissions and finding the issues.
For the next WAT workshop, we are planning to conduct context-aware MT evaluations.
The test data of WAT is prepared using the paragraph as a unit, while almost all other evaluation campaigns use the sentence as a unit.
Therefore, it is suitable to investigate the importance of the context for the translation.Also, we are very happy to include other languages if there are available resources.
Tables 11, 12, 13 and 14 summarize all the submissions listed in the automatic evaluation server at the point of WAT2014 workshop (4th, October, 2014).
The OTHER RESOURCES column shows the use of other resources such as parallel corpora, monolingual corpora and parallel dictionaries in addition to ASPEC.
NAIST 1 - ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ NAIST 2 ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ Kyoto-U 1 - - - - - > ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ SMT S2T - - - > > ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ TOSHIBA 1 - - - - ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ RBMT D - - - ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ EIWA - - ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ Kyoto-U 2 - ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ TOSHIBA 2 ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ Online D ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ SMT Hiero ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ Sense ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ NII 1 ≫ ≫ ≫ NII 2 - - TMU 1 -NAIST 1 ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ NAIST 2 ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ WEBLIO-EJ1 1 - ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ Online A > ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ Kyoto-U 1 - > ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ WEBLIO-EJ1 2 - - > ≫ ≫ ≫ SMT T2S - - ≫ ≫ ≫ Kyoto-U 2 - ≫ ≫ ≫ SMT Hiero > ≫ ≫ SAS MT ≫ ≫ Sense -SMT S2T Sense NICT SMT Hiero NAIST 2 TOSHIBA 1 Kyoto-U 1 BJTUNLP TOSHIBA 2 Kyoto-U 2 Online D RBMT B NAIST 1 - ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ SMT S2T - ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ Sense - ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ NICT - > ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ SMT Hiero - - - ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ NAIST 2 - - > ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ TOSHIBA 1 - > ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ Kyoto-U 1 - > ≫ ≫ ≫ BJTUNLP - > ≫ ≫ TOSHIBA 2 - ≫ ≫ Kyoto-U 2 ≫ ≫ Online D >NAIST 1 ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ NAIST 2 ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ SAS MT ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ SMT T2S - ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ EIWA ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ ≫ Kyoto-U 1 - - ≫ ≫ ≫ Kyoto-U 2 - ≫ ≫ ≫ SMT Hiero ≫ ≫ ≫ Sense ≫ ≫ Online A ≫
