The foregoing is an account of the sense in which "work" is used in CCO.
It's a quite different sense from the way in which "work" is used in IFLA's Functional requirements for bibliographic records (FRBR).
The difference is clearly noted in CCO itself, albeit in a footnote [Slide 12].
"Work in CCO is more concrete than work as defined in FRBR . . . The work in CCO is usually a physical entity, whereas that in FRBR is an abstraction or intellectual entity, such as a literary work or a musical composition.
"Here [Slide 13] is a much simplified version of FRBR's entity-relationship model, for direct comparison with the one underlying CCO that we looked at a minute ago.
Two important things to note here are (i) the distinction made in this model that isn't made in the CCO model, between works and the kinds of things that FRBR calls expressions, manifestations, and items, and (ii) the distinction made in the CCO model that isn't made in this one, between works and images.
So let's take a closer look at the definitions provided in the FRBR report of its so-called Group 1 entities [Slide 14].
A work is "a distinct intellectual or artistic creation . . . an abstract entity."
An expression is "the specific intellectual or artistic form that a work takes each time it is 'realized' "; "the intellectual or artistic realization of a work in the form of alpha-numeric, musical, or choreographic notation, sound, image, object, movement, etc., or any combination of such forms."
A manifestation [Slide 15] is "the physical embodiment of an expression of a work . . . [the set of] all the physical objects that bear the same characteristics, in respect to both intellectual content and physical form."
An item is "a single exemplar [or instance] of a manifestation . . . a concrete entity . . . in many instances a single physical object.
"One note I'll make here is that this use of "physical" in the definition of "manifestation" is rather odd, since a set or class of physical items isn't physical-its members might be, but the class itself is an abstraction, just as expressions and works in FRBR are abstractions.
The main point is that, in FRBR-speak, it is the FRBR entity-type called "Item" (and not the one called "Work") that most closely corresponds with the CCO entity-type "Work."
In CCO, works are concrete, physical objects.
In FRBR, the only things that are concrete, physical objects are items.
The other Group 1 entities in FRBR are all abstractions.
So let's try to make this discussion a little less abstract, and a little more concrete!
According to FRBR, this [Slide 16] is how works, expressions, manifestations, and items are related to one another: works are realized through expressions, which are embodied in manifestations, which are exemplified by items.
What does this mean in practice?
Here [Slide 17] is a literary example.
Imagine that I have in my hand a single copy of Ecco's 2003 edition of Edith Grossman's English translation of Don Quixote.
That copy would exemplify or instantiate a distinct edition (or manifestation), which in turn would embody a distinct text (or translation, or version, or expression), which in turn would realize a distinct intellectual or artistic creation (or work).
One way of looking at this might be to think about a hierarchy of sets and supersets and supersupersets of copies.
In this view, the work that we call Don Quixote is ultimately the set of all the copies of all the editions of all its texts.The point of FRBR's making these kinds of relationship explicit is to improve the design of catalogs and thus to improve catalog users' experiences.
Before FRBR, most library catalog records would represent manifestations, and people searching on the titles of works would be faced with results lists that look something like this [Slide 18]-which is a display of the top eight results, sorted in no immediately discernible order, that one gets if one searches for Don Quixote in the title field of the CARLWeb interface to Los Angeles Public Library's current catalog.
4 None of these eight records happens to point to an edition of the novel by Cervantes.In But what happens if we try to think about works of visual art, rather than musical works or literary works, using this scheme of Works, Expressions, Manifestations, and Items ("WEMI")?
What happens if, for instance, we try to fit Magritte's La condition humaine (1935) into this scheme [Slide 22]?
Truth is, it doesn't really work very well.
We might even wish to ask ourselves, "Why bother?"
The fundamental difference is that the painting, the object, like many other cultural objects, is unique.
It's not like a book or a vinyl record, of which multiple instances or "copies" exist.
It's not as if we really need to go to the trouble of counting the instances of manifestations of expressions of this work: there's only one instance of this work, period.
If we continue to think about manifestations, expressions, and works as sets, then we will presumably conclude that the work that we call Magritte's La condition humaine (1935) has one member expression, which has one member manifestation, which has one member item.
And it's important to recognize that it's not simply that this singularity is actually the case.
It's that, in the case of painting as an art form, it's necessarily the case.So something interesting is going on here.
It seems as if FRBR's "WEMI" scheme is applicable to certain kinds of cultural objects-specifically, the ones that CCO explicitly excludes from its definition of cultural objects-but not others.
People working in cultural informatics aren't the only ones thinking about these kinds of issue.
In fact, philosophers have been thinking about them over a much longer period, and questions like "What is a work?"
are central to the subfield of philosophy of art known as ontology of art [Slide 23].
6 Other related questions considered in ontology of art include: What is the nature of the various sorts of relationship that exist between works of art and things of other sorts?
And, in what does the identity of a work of art (of a given sort) consist?
(For instance, are translations of novels, "cover" versions of songs, and "director's cuts" of movies new works, or just different expressions of the same work?)
Why should we in cultural informatics take any interest in the results of work in the ontology of art [Slide 24]?
The reason is the same as the reason for taking account of the work in library science, most recently exemplified by FRBR but stretching back to Cutter, that emphasizes the importance of identifying the kinds of groups (or sets, or classes) to which objects belong, and providing catalog users with the means to browse or navigate among those classes so that they can find the objects they want.
So let's take a quick look at some of the findings, firstly of ontology of literature, and then of ontology of art in general [Slide 25].
Most contemporary philosophers treat literary works, such as Don Quixote, as types, where the word "type" is used in a special sense derived from Peirce, in which any given type is instantiated (or, more strictly speaking, instantiatable) by multiple tokens.
The idea is that, just as there exist multiple separate occurrences of the same word, and multiple separate utterances of the same sentence, there can exist multiple separate instances of the same text.But what criteria do philosophers use to decide whether two tokens are tokens of the same type [Slide 26]?
Different people have come up with different ideas to take care of various problem cases in different ways, 7 and I'm not going to go further into these today, except to specifically note one idea dating back to Charles Stevenson 8 in the 1950s [Slide 27], which is relevant because his conception of what he called the "megatype" is similar to FRBR's conception of "work," and in fact serves as a bridge connecting (i) the ideas underlying FRBR's WEMI hierarchy, and (ii) the ideas underlying vocabulary control as it is applied in library science.
Just as a concept can be viewed as a set of words that share the same meaning, and a proposition can be viewed as a set of sentences that share the same meaning, so a work can be viewed as a set of texts or translations that share the same meaning.In ontology of art in general, there is continuous debate between proponents of what are called uniform theories and proponents of non-uniform theories [Slide 28].
9 Uniform theories are those that explain the nature of all artworks, in whatever art form, in the same way.
Among the proponents of uniform theories, there are unitarians and dualists.
Unitarians argue that the Peircean distinction between types and tokens is not actually characteristic of any of the arts, not even the literary arts.
I've provisionally characterized CCO as an application of a unitarian theory, since CCO similarly does not allow for the representation of type/token relationships (at least, not at the entity-type level).
Dualists argue that the Peircean type/token distinction is in fact characteristic of all the arts, even the visual arts, in which at first glance it might not appear particularly useful to distinguish between the work we call La condition humaine and the particular object hanging on the wall that instantiates that work.
I've provisionally placed FRBR in the dualist category, since FRBR similarly does not allow for simpler treatment of works of visual art.Proponents of non-uniform theories, including Stephen Davies-arguably the leading figure in contemporary ontology of art-argue that the type/token distinction is characteristic of some arts, but not others [Slide 29].
10 According to this view, some art forms are characterized by the creation of what might be called singular works-paintings, hewn sculptures, Polaroids, many buildingsthat do not have multiple instances.
Other art forms are characterized by the creation of what might be called "type-works," that can have multiple instances.
The thing to note is that here we're not just talking about literary works and musical works, but also several common kinds of works of visual art-cast sculptures, prints, and photographs from negatives, for instance.
What this all leads us to, in conclusion, is some questions for discussion: two and a half questions, to be exact [Slide 30].
The two main questions are: 1.
Should CCO be modified in the light of FRBR?
, and 2.
Should FRBR be modified in the light of CCO?
In FRBR, we have the explicit facility to represent the relationships between type-works and their instances.
In CCO, this facility is buried below the level of the underlying conceptual model.
Does that matter?
Then, in CCO, we have the explicit facility to represent the relationships between objects and their images.
In FRBR, this facility is buried below the level of the underlying conceptual model.
Does that matter?
Then, finally, if images-that is, photographs from negatives, slides, and digital images-are themselves type-works in the sense that they can be instantiated by multiple copies, is it possible that the distinction in CCO between works and images at the entity-type level is less useful than a simple distinction between different sub-types of "Work"?
In fact, isn't it precisely their "typeworkness"-their instantiatability-that makes images distinctive?
Could this recognition form the basis of a FRBRized CCO?
