A mutually anonymous service hides the identity of a client from the service provider and vice-versa.
Providing mutual anonymity usually requires a large number of participants.
While peer-to-peer (P2P) networks are capable of recruiting a large number of participants, reliable anonymous communication in these architectures, with low band-width usage, still needs further investigation.
This paper presents MuON, a protocol to achieve mutual anonymity in unstructured P2P networks.
MuON leverages epidemic-style data dissemination to deal with the high churn (changes in system membership) characteristic of un-structured P2P networks.
The results from our security analysis and simulation show that MuON provides mutual anonymity over unstructured P2P networks while maintaining predictable latencies, high reliability, and low communication overhead.
Many online applications such as banking, electronic voting, information sharing and searching etc, need anonymity to prevent third parties (or adversaries) from gathering information related to services and their clients.
Most of these online services have a common model of interaction; a client (the initiator) sends a request to a node (the responder) that provides the service.
The responder processes the request, and sends the corresponding response to the initiator.
Based on this model of interactions, different types of anonymity [22,25,36] can be provided to applications: initiator anonymity, responder anonymity, mutual anonymity and unlinkability.
Initiator anonymity hides the identity of the initiator from the responder and adversary.
Responder anonymity hides the identity of the re- * Author was supported in part by NSF CAREER grant CCR-9984682 sponder from the initiator and adversary.
Mutual anonymity provides both initiator anonymity and responder anonymity.
Unlinkability of initiator and responder means that the initiator and responder cannot be identified as communicating with each other, even though they can be identified as participating in some communication.Different approaches have successfully achieved various forms of anonymity.
In the simplest approach, a proxy is used for communication between initiator and responder [1,13].
However, this system fails if the proxy itself reveals the identities of the communicating parties.
To overcome this single point of failure, most anonymity protocols [3,11,12,24,25,37] provide anonymous communication using indirection; messages from the sender (initiator/responder) are routed through the intermediate relay nodes till they reach the final destination (responder/initiator).
Some anonymity protocols [29,31,32] multicast messages to a large group of nodes to provide anonymous communication.
It is important to note that in both approaches, the anonymity in the system improves as the number of participant nodes increases.Experiences with P2P systems indicate the ability of these architectures to attract a large number of participants.
There have been anonymity protocols that use different kinds of P2P systems such as structured P2P systems [37], IP layer P2P systems [12] and hybrid P2P systems [36] for providing anonymity.
An unstructured P2P network does not impose a structure on its participant nodes and thus has several desirable characteristics such as administrative ease, ease of deployment and self-organization.
Unstructured P2P networks however, pose significant challenges for anonymous communication protocols.
An example of this kind of network is the Gnutella file sharing system, which is known to consume high bandwidth [27].
A study by Saroiu et al.[28] has shown that P2P systems exhibit high churn (changes in system membership); peers frequently leave/join the network and most peers are connected to the overlay for a short period of time.
Similarly the nodes within the P2P network cannot be trusted by the anonymity protocol.
These peers may attempt to tamper with messages, masquerade as the responder, drop messages that they are supposed to forward, or subvert the protocol by any other means.
The peers within the network could also collude to violate the anonymity guarantees.In this paper, we present MuON, a protocol for mutual anonymity and unlinkability over unstructured P2P networks.
The key contribution is its epidemic-style [6,17,34] message sending protocol.
Our simulation results show that it achieves anonymous communication with high reliability while maintaining low latencies and low overhead.The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses the goals of MuON.
Section 3 summarizes the prior approaches for anonymity and introduces epidemic protocols.
Section 4 describes MuON in detail, followed by the anonymity and performance evaluations in section 5.
The contributions and future work are summarized in section 6.
The main motivation of MuON is to strike a balance between performance and anonymity in a dynamic unstructured P2P network.
The main goals are described below: Mutual Anonymity: An initiator sends a request for a service without knowing which node actually provides the service.
Likewise, the responder sends responses without knowing the identity of the initiator.
Unlinkability: Identities of the communicating parties (initiators and responders) are hidden from adversaries.
Bounded Latencies: Communication latency is bounded.
High Reliability: The messages sent by the initiator to the responder and vice-versa are delivered reliably.
Communication Overhead: The communication overhead incurred by each participant peer should be low.
Scalability: Metrics like reliability, anonymity, communication latency and overhead should scale well with the size of the P2P network and the churn within the network.
Message Integrity and Confidentiality: Intermediate nodes cannot modify messages and cannot masquerade as responders; requests sent by an initiator can be read only by the corresponding responder; responses can be read only by the initiator, which sent the corresponding request.
This section reviews prior systems that provide different kinds of anonymity over various network architectures.
One of the earliest proposed approaches for anonymous communication is Chaum's Mix-Net [7], which is the basis of subsequent systems like Babel [15] and Mixminion [9].
These approaches hide the communication between sender and receiver by encrypting messages in layers of public key cryptography.
Messages are relayed through a group of dedicated message relays called "mixes".
Each mix decrypts messages, delays, and reorders messages before relaying them to another mix.
These systems achieve strong anonymity guarantees at the cost of latency.
While they provide anonymity against global adversaries, the random delaying within the mix network results in unbounded and high latencies unsuitable for interactive applications.
Several systems use a proxy to provide anonymity.
Examples include Anonymizer [1] and Lucent Personalized Web Assistant [13] which use an intermediate proxy to provide anonymity to users.
Likewise PRA: Proxy for Responder Anonymity [29] uses a proxy to provide responder anonymity, while APFS Unicast [29] uses an intermediate proxy and onion routing to provide mutual anonymity.
Proxy based systems place a great deal of trust on the proxy.
Thus they are vulnerable to failure if the proxy is compromised and reveals the identity of the communicating parties.
Many protocols provide anonymous communication by forwarding messages along a single anonymous path, formed through the group of nodes within the infrastructure.
This anonymous path can be specifically created, or is formed by random forwarding.Onion Routing [24] provides anonymous communication using a dedicated set of message relays called "onion routers".
The sender selects a path from the set of onion routers.
It then wraps the data within encrypted layers to form an onion.
The innermost layer of encryption in the onion uses the encryption key of the path's last hop, while the outermost layer uses the encryption key of the path's first hop.
Onion routers co-operate and forward the onion from the sender to the destination.
Tor [11], the second generation of Onion Routing, provides initiator anonymity and responder anonymity by using rendezvous points.Xiao et al. [36] propose two protocols for mutual anonymity in hybrid P2P networks.
These protocols, named Center-Directing and Label-Switching, use trusted third parties to provide anonymity.
They also proposed Shortcut-Responding [36], which combines onion routing and broadcasting to provide mutual anonymity within unstructured P2P networks.TAP [37] provides initiator anonymity in structured P2P networks by building replicated tunnels.
The replicated tunnels enable the protocol to combat network churn.Tarzan [12] is an anonymous IP layer P2P system that provides initiator anonymity.
Initiators create tunnels through the overlay by distributing session keys.
The data is then passed through this tunnel using layered encryption/decryption (analogous to onion routing).
Crowds [25] provides initiator anonymity using random forwarding.
The initiator sends the (suitably encrypted) message to a randomly chosen node in the network called jondo.
Each jondo randomly decides to either send the data to the responder or to forward it to another jondo.In networks with high churn (nodes frequently join and leave the P2P network), approaches that utilize single anonymous paths are bound to suffer from path losses.
Consider an anonymous path of length n nodes.
If p is the probability of a node leaving the overlay, then a given path is valid with a probability of (1 − p) n .
With increasing path lengths (increasing n) and increasing churn within the network (increasing p), the probability that a given path is valid diminishes.
Hence approaches using a single-path will incur with greater probability, the additional overhead of detecting and rebuilding failed paths.
Providing this kind of fault tolerance will likely be a high overhead operation and has not been extensively explored in the context of maintaining anonymity guarantees.
Many systems use group communication primitives like multicasting and flooding to achieve anonymity.
P 5 , Peer-to-Peer Personal Privacy Protocol [31] proposes a novel approach for mutual anonymity using broadcast channels.
It defines a logical hierarchy of broadcast groups, and the nodes within the P2P network join one or more of these groups when entering the system.GAP [3] (part of GNUnet) uses controlled flooding to achieve initiator and responder anonymity in a P2P network.
APFS (Anonymous P2P File Sharing) [29] includes APFS Multicast, a protocol that uses multicasting to provide mutual anonymity within P2P file sharing applications.Hordes [32] provides initiator anonymity using multicasting.
A multicast group is formed by all the initiator nodes.
Initiators send requests to responders using Crowds or Onion routing, while the responder multicasts the response to the group of initiators.Protocols that depend on group communication primitives like multicasting are ideally suited for networks with high churn, because the departure of a few nodes does not substantially impact the communication between the sender and receiver.
Previous work [32] also indicates that the use of multicasting helps reduce communication latencies.
However, the lack of widespread deployment of IP multicast infrastructure inhibits deployment of protocols based on this type of multicast [29,31].
GAP [3] takes a higher Hordes [32] uses single-path forwarding to send requests, and potentially incurs the additional overhead of detecting and rebuilding failed paths.
Epidemic (or gossip) protocols [10] are a well-studied class of protocols for low-cost reliable data dissemination within groups.
They have been shown to be much more efficient than flooding based approaches [23,33].
Epidemic protocols provide higher reliability and scalability while using lower bandwidth [17], when compared to other reliable multicast protocols.
They provide a bimodal guarantee of reliability [6]; a message reaches all members of the group with a high probability, and the probability that it will reach to just a few members of the group is very low.
Studies have shown that the time required to disseminate data to the entire group is log(N ), where N is the number of nodes within the group.
Due to these desirable characteristics, MuON uses an epidemic-style protocol for data dissemination.A simplified gossip protocol is depicted in Figure 1.
Each node runs several rounds of the gossip protocol.
In each round, a node selects a random node as its gossip target.
The node sends the gossip target(s) a gossip message containing a list of message identifiers that it has heard of (represented by dotted lines between nodes).
If the list contains a message identifier which the gossip target has not received, the gossip target will request the node to send it (represented by solid lines between nodes).
Three important parameters that impact gossip protocols are F anOut, T interval and GC.
F anOut is the number of gossip targets used in each round (F anOut is two in the figure).
T interval is the time between successive protocol rounds.
(In the figure, since node p is seen to start gossip rounds at time t1 and t6, T interval = t6−t1).
GC (Gossip Count) determines the number of rounds a message is gossiped by a node.
These parameters determine the speed and efficiency of the protocol and have been rigorously studied by Birman et al [6].
This section first describes the the system model and assumptions for deploying MuON.
It then describes the data dissemination (message sending) protocol along with the notation used.
The message sending protocol is used in both directions, from initiator to responder and vice-versa.
Finally, it describes how the message sending protocol is used for communication between the initiator and responder.
MuON operates over an unstructured P2P network.
Let N be the number of nodes within the overlay (referred to as the overlay size).
We assume that nodes within the overlay know at least log(N ) other peers in the overlay.
This membership list for epidemic protocols can be maintained using services such as SCAMP [14] and "Peer Sampling Service" [18].
MuON assumes that all initiators and responders are members of the P2P network.
All protocol messages use low-cost unreliable transport (UDP) for communication.Services are identified by a service identifier.
To send a request for a particular service, the initiator obtains the public key corresponding to the service.
This public key is used for initiating the communication between the initiator and responder.
Thus the identity of the responder node that provides the service, is not revealed to the initiator.
The message sending protocol of MuON ensures that initiator and responder anonymity and unlinkability are maintained.
The use of public and session keys ensure that data integrity and confidentiality are maintained.
The public keys of MuON are not tied to any specific algorithm; for example incomparable public keys [35] could be used.The protocol assumes that there exists some mechanism that provides public keys corresponding to the service identifier.
The system places some trust on this mechanism; the mechanism provides correct public keys only and it does not reveal the identity of the node corresponding to the public key.
For convenience, the protocol description assumes the presence of a trusted PKI (Public Key Infrastructure), though an initiator could obtain public keys out-of-band.
It is interesting to note that the communication between the PKI and the initiator itself must be done anonymously.
However, it is easy to conceive the PKI as a service within MuON itself, whose public key is well known and distributed out-of-band.
Before looking into the details of the MuON, we first look at the notation used within the protocol.
The message sending protocol of MuON is unidirectional; it is used to send requests from an initiator to a responder and then again to send a response from the responder to the initiator.
Let MSG denote the encapsulated data to be sent (thus MSG may be a request or a response).
MuON generates a header, denoted MSG HDR, that corresponds to MSG.
We assume 1 that the size of MSG HDR is much less than MSG, since MSG HDR contains only the required identifiers and cryptographic keys (details are in section 4.4).
The basic operation of the protocol is depicted in Fig- ure 2, which shows node X sending MSG to node Y. MuON uses an epidemic protocol to disseminate MSG HDR to all nodes within the P2P network, while the larger MSG is disseminated to only a few nodes within the network (shaded within Figure 2).
As explained in detail later, the number of nodes which receive MSG depends on the value of p inter .
1 This assumption holds true in applications with large responses (e.g. file-transfer and web-browsing).
In these applications, MuON achieves substantial bandwidth savings compared to other group communication based anonymity protocols.
We anticipate that MuON will provide a bandwidth reduction for applications with small data messages (e.g. e-voting) that require reliable delivery, though these applications are not evaluated in this paper.
The protocol ensures that the responder always gets MSG.
As the larger MSG is not sent to the entire network, MuON substantially reduces the bandwidth usage.
Also, since multiple nodes within the network receive MSG (all the shaded nodes), multiple nodes are potential receivers and senders of MSG, giving MuON its anonymity guarantees.
MuON derives its properties of reliability and bounded latencies from its epidemic nature.Every node running MuON maintains two buffers; one to store the message headers (called headerBuffer) and the other to store the corresponding messages (called messageBuffer).
Every node tracks the number of protocol rounds each header has been gossiped (called the gossipCount).
Algorithm 1 describes the details for handling these buffers.
Algorithm 2 explains the protocol executed by each node after every T interval units of time.
This algorithm describes an epidemic protocol for disseminating the headers.
Each node selects F anOut random nodes from the group as gossip targets and sends them a list with each message header MSG HDR currently within headerBuffer.
As given in algorithm 3, whenever A gets the message, A tries to decrypt 2 the message.
If A can decrypt the message, it indicates that the message was intended for A and thus A contacts currOwner and pulls the message.
In this case A also gossips with its neighbors that it has the message to send.
Thus the responder in MuON behaves exactly the same as any other node in the network (with the exception that it always pulls the message).
If A cannot decrypt the message then A performs one of two actions: it may just add the header to its header buffer or with some probability p inter it may go back and get the corresponding MSG from B.
In the first case, A gossips with its neighbors that B currently has the message.
In the second case, when A gets the MSG from B, it changes the currOwner field of MSG HDR to A. Thus when A gossips the header, it will indicate itself as the owner of the message.
With this property, MuON achieves its anonymity guarantees as there are potentially many owners of the same message.
While the message sending protocol of MuON helps achieve anonymity, cryptographic measures are required to ensure message integrity and confidentiality.
This subsection describes how the dissemination protocol is used by initiators and responders for secure anonymous communication.Sending a request: The following steps are performed, when an initiator I sends a request for service S. Let data represent information contained in the request message and id be an application specific message identifier.1.
I generates a symmetric session key k session , which is used to encrypt all data messages.2.
I generates a nonce r 1 , which is used to correlate responses with this request.3.
Using the PKI, I obtains the public key k + s associated with the service S.4.
The MSG is generated as {r1, id, data}ksession.
= {r1, ksession, k + I , {H(D)}k − I }k + s where D = {r 1 , k session , k + I ,MSG }.
Responding to a request: Algorithm 3 ultimately delivers MSG HDR and MSG to the peer providing the service S. Let some node R provide the service S. Suppose R receives hdr and its corresponding MSG.
R proceeds with the following steps.1.
R decrypts hdr using k − s , to obtain k session , r 1 and the initiator's public key k + I .
R now runs integrity checks with the cryptographic hash.2.
Using k session , R decrypts MSG to recover the request.3.
Let response be the corresponding reply, which R needs to send to I. R creates MSG = {r 1 , id, reponse}k session .
Here ksession and r1 are sent by the initiator and recovered by R in step 1.4.
R creates a header hdr corresponding to the response as hdr = {r 1 , {H(D)}k − S }k + I , where D = {r 1 ,MSG}.
5.
R now invokes sendMessage(hdr,MSG) (Algorithm 1).
In this section, we evaluate the performance, anonymity and other security guarantees of MuON.
We first study the impact of overlay size and churn on the various performance metrics of MuON.
We then evaluate the anonymity and other security guarantees of the protocol.
Measurement studies of unstructured P2P networks [5,28,30] indicate that these systems exhibit dynamic membership, because peers alternately join and leave the network.
Peers participate in the protocol only during the time between joining and leaving the network.
This time is called the session time and the resultant dynamism is called the network churn.
The network churn is related to the average session time of the peers within the network.
As the average session time decreases, the membership of the P2P network changes at a faster rate and is said to exhibit a higher churn [20,26].
Prior experiences [8,20,26] indicate that network churn impacts the performance of protocols over P2P networks.
Hence we evaluate MuON by simulating the protocol over unstructured P2P networks of varying sizes and varying churn.
We model network churn using an approach similar to that described by Liben-Nowell et al. [21].
This model has also been used for evaluating distributed hash tables over P2P networks [20,26].
Peers within the network are assigned exponentially distributed session times.
When a peer reaches the end of its session time, it leaves the network.
Prior work [16] has shown that the average session time (amount of churn) within a network depends on the application.
Since MuON is not specific to any application, we simulate networks with varying churn (session time).
We simulate MuON using PeerSim [19], a P2P simulator designed specifically for epidemic protocols.
The simulator executes the protocol in a series of cycles, where the time interval between each cycle is assumed to be sufficient for unidirectional unreliable (UDP) message transmission with a loss rate of 5%.
In our simulation model, a network with churn 0 is a static network, which does not change during the simulation.
At churn 0, the average session time was chosen as 150 cycles (a factor of 10 over the maximum time for one run of the protocol), to enable simulation of several rounds of MuON simultaneously.
An increase of 0.1 in network churn decreases the average session time of the nodes by a factor of 1 10 .
When a node leaves the network, it is replaced by a new node, thus keeping the overlay size constant.
This helps us to understand the impact of overlay size and churn independently.The simulations are used to study the impact of increasing overlay size and churn on the various protocol metrics.
In the simulation FanOut and GC are maintained at log 2 (overlay size) and T interval is maintained at 1 cycle.
These parameters are common to all epidemic protocols and do not impact anonymity guarantees.
Their impact on performance is similar to that determined by previous studies [6] and is reported in [2].
The impact of intermediate probability p inter is studied in section 5.2.
Unless specified, the value of p inter is assumed to be 0.5.
Reliability The reliability of MuON is measured by the delivery ratio achieved in networks of varying sizes and churn.
The delivery ratio is the fraction of the sent requests that were ultimately delivered at the final destination.
Thus delivaryratio = number of requests delivered number of requests sent .
When delivery ratio is one, it indicates that all requests that were sent were eventually delivered at their destination, thus indicating reliable communication.
Figure 3 shows the delivery ratio for networks with varying sizes and churn.
It can be seen that MuON maintains a high delivery ratio of almost one, independent of the overlay size and churn.
This high reliability indicates its suitability for highly dynamic P2P networks.
losses.
Since MuON operates over an overlay network, we measure the latency in terms of number of protocol cycles required for the message to be delivered at its destination.
Figure 4 shows the average number of cycles required for messages to be delivered; the bars indicate the variation in the delivery latency.
It can be seen that the delivery latency is almost constant irrespective of the overlay size and churn, indicating that the latencies provided by MuON are predictable and bounded.Resource Consumption When a peer joins MuON, it contributes some of its resources to help forward messages from other peers.
Hence we study the amount of resources a peer has to expend, to help other peers achieve anonymity.In MuON, a peer needs resources to send, encrypt, decrypt and store messages.
In general, the resources consumed by a node are directly proportional to the number of messages (header and data) it has to process.
Figure 5 shows the average number of headers and data messages that are processed on each peer, whenever some peer sends an anonymous message.
It can be seen that irrespective of the overlay size and churn, the number of header messages processed is bounded and relatively low.
The graph also indicates that each peer has to process very few data messages.
Header messages are small in size and thus the processing overhead for each header, storage and bandwidth is low.
MuON uses private/public key encryption for small headers and faster symmetric cryptography for large data messages, to reduce the encryption overhead.Comparative Bandwidth Use MuON's message sending protocol has been designed to use low bandwidth as compared to previous multicast-based anonymity protocols.
Let HDR size and DAT A size be the size of header and data messages respectively and N be the number of nodes within the overlay.
Consider the bandwidth consumed when one data message is sent anonymously.
A multicast-based anonymity protocol will multicast this message to N nodes.
Hence the bandwidth consumed will be at least N * DAT A size .
Note that this is a conservative estimate, since it ignores the bandwidth consumed by control messages and data message re-transmissions required in the presence of network churn.
On the other hand, MuON disseminates the data message to only a subset of nodes within the overlay, ensuring that the final destination is a member of this subset.
Let β be the size of the subset of nodes that receive the message.
The bandwidth consumed in MuON is k * N * HDR size + β * DAT A size , where k is the number of headers processed by each node.
Since Figure 5 indicates that the value of k is low and HDR size is small 3 , we approximate the bandwidth consumed as β * DAT A size .
The value of β depends on the intermediate probability p inter .
We generated figure 6 by simulation, which indicates the value of β with values of p inter of 0.3, 0.5 and 0.8.
The value of N is also shown for clarity.
It can be seen that the value of β is always lower than N , indicating that MuON would use lower bandwidth compared to other multicast-based approaches.
It is also interesting to note that as the value of p inter decreases, the bandwidth consumption decreases.Scalability An important characteristic that is evident from the results presented above, is the scalability of MuON.
The protocol's reliability, latency bounds and resource consumption are almost constant irrespective of the overlay size and churn.
3 Considering 128 bit cryptographic hash, 128 bit cryptographic keys, 32 bit IP addresses and 32 bit nonce, the maximum size of hdr is 416 bits and HDR size = 576 bits (72 bytes).
If the data being transferred is a 1 MB media file then DAT A size = 1048576 bytes.
For an overlay of size 10, 000 at churn 0, k = 12 from figure 5 and β = 3000 from figure 6.
Hence the volume of MuON header messages is 8437.5KB and the volume of MuON data messages is 3072000KB.
In this section, we first discuss how MuON achieves mutual anonymity and the parameters that impact it.
We then evaluate the anonymity guarantees by describing the protocol behavior under various attacks from the adversary.Mutual Anonymity in MuON Similar to anonymity protocols that use multicasting [29] or broadcasting [31], MuON achieves mutual anonymity on the virtue that several intermediate peers receive the messages.
When an intermediate node receives a MSG, it gossips the corresponding MSG HDR with itself as the owner.
From an observer's perspective, any node claiming to be the current owner could be the actual sender of the message.
Similarly, when an intermediate node receives MSG HDR, it pulls the corresponding MSG with a probability of p inter .
Thus from the observer's perspective, any intermediate node that eventually receives the MSG could potentially be the receiver.
Thus in the protocol, an observer (initiator, responder or intermediate nodes) cannot differentiate the initiator and responder from the other peers.
The use of public keys also enables the initiator and responder to communicate without knowing the identity of each other.
Thus mutual anonymity and unlinkability is achieved.
The degree of anonymity provided by multicast based anonymity systems depends on the number of nodes that have an equiprobable chance of playing a certain role (initiator/responder).
Let S (called the anonymity set) denote the set of nodes that have an equiprobable chance of being the initiator/responder in a system.
Shields et al. [32] show that the degree of anonymity in the system is 1 − 1 |S| .
In MuON, for a given communicating pair of initiator and responder, any node that receives MSG has an equiprobable chance of being the initiator or responder.
Hence the anonymity set is the set containing all nodes that receive MSG.
Using simulations, we measured the size of the anonymity set for a given MSG, when it is delivered at its destination.
Figure 7 shows the average size of the anonymity set expressed as percentage of nodes within the overlay that received a given MSG.
It can be seen that the anonymity set increases with increasing values of p inter .
However, for a given value of p inter , the anonymity set remains fairly constant independent of the churn within the network.
This indicates that the degree of anonymity provided by MuON is independent of the network churn.The anonymity set (and hence the degree of anonymity provided by MuON) and the bandwidth consumed ( Figure 6) increase as the value of p inter increases.
Thus when p inter is 1, the protocol would provide the maximum degree of anonymity.
However, the protocol will perform a multicast and thus the bandwidth consumption would be maximized.
On the other hand, when p inter = 0 the protocol performs a unicast, resulting in minimum anonymity and the bandwidth consumed would be minimized.
Thus p inter represents a tradeoff 4 within MuON between performance and anonymity.
Attacks by Adversary Anonymity protocols are susceptible to several possible attacks.
However, the successful completion of these attacks may require the adversary to utilize varying amounts of resources.
To evaluate the anonymity guarantees of MuON, we describe 4 The degree of anonymity decreases gradually with p inter .
Consider a network of 10,000 nodes with churn 0.
If p inter = 1 then |S| = 10, 000 and degree of anonymity is 0.9999.
From figure 7, if p inter = 0.8 then |S| = 0.50 * 10, 000 and degree of anonymity is 0.9998.
various attacks and describe MuON's behavior under attack.
It can be seen that though some attacks are possible against MuON, the resources required by the adversary to successfully complete the attack are substantial.Local eavesdropper: A local eavesdropper is an adversary that is able to monitor all communications sent to or received from one particular protocol participant.
This adversary tries to detect the identity of communicating parties by recording and comparing all incoming and outgoing messages of a particular node.
In MuON a local eavesdropper on an intermediate node, cannot confirm the identities of the communicating parties, even if the message and its header are received by the intermediate node.
This is because the header and message do not contain any form of identification of initiator and responder.Collusion Attack: In a collusion attack, nodes within the system collaborate to identify the communicating entities.
It has been seen that the degree of anonymity in MuON is 1 − 1 |S| where S is the anonymity set.
This implies that as long as a single intermediate node within the anonymity set does not collaborate, it is hard for colluding nodes to differentiate with certainty, the initiator, responder and the honest intermediate nodes from one another.
If all |S| nodes within the anonymity set collaborate, the degree of anonymity provided by MuON becomes 0 and the identities of the communicating parties can be revealed.
However, since the anonymity set changes for every MSG exchanged between the initiator and responder, all nodes in the network must collaborate to launch this attack successfully.Timing attack: In a timing attack, the adversary (behaving as an initiator) attempts to identify the responder by analyzing the round trip time (RTT) of a request, since short RTT indicates that the responder is nearby.
In MuON since the messages are transferred over the overlay network, RTT measurements do not reflect actual network locations.
Thus launching a timing attack is difficult.
An adversary can launch a variant of the timing attack against MuON, by identifing the initiator as the first node to gossip a particular MSG.
To launch this attack, the adversary would have to trace outgoing messages of every node within the network, to identify a particular node as the first node to gossip a message.
However in this attack, the adversary cannot identify the responder, since the responder behaves like an intermediate node and continues to gossip the MSG.Traceback attacks: There are two kinds of traceback attacks: passive traceback and active traceback.
In a passive traceback attack, the adversary examines the stored routing state of the peers to identify the path(s) between initiator and responder.
To launch a passive traceback against MuON, the adversary needs to look at the application level message buffers at every node within the network.
However, since the messages are periodically removed from the buffers, to perform a successful traceback the adversary must collect the information before it is removed.
In an active traceback attack, the adversary has control of the network infrastructure and is able to follow an active and continuing stream of packets back through the network to their point of origin.
In MuON, such an adversary can identify the sender of a message (it is the starting point of the message paths).
However, the recipient is not revealed (since paths do not terminate at the recipient).
Predecessor attacks: These attacks occur if the same path is used by the initiator while communicating to the responder.
If a compromised node records its predecessor, then most of the time the initiator will be the predecessor.
However in MuON as every node randomly picks up the gossip target, different messages follow different paths.
Hence this type of attack is not possible in MuON.Message volume attack: An adversary can differentiate responders from other nodes by observing the volume of data transmitted, since initiators generate less data as compared to responders.
This attack is possible against MuON, if the adversary is a global adversary and can observe the traffic generated by each node in the network.Intersection Attack: This attack can be launched by a global adversary, who can observe all the various communication paths within the network.
The initiator and responder will always be on the communication path, and the intersection of these paths would reveal the identity of the initiator and responder.
Like several other anonymity protocols, MuON is vulnerable to intersection attacks.In summary, we see that MuON can resist most kinds of attacks in the absence of a global adversary.
We believe that such an adversary is impractical for large and dynamic P2P systems, though many of these attacks can be thwarted by means of cover traffic [4].
In MuON, message confidentiality and integrity are achieved using cryptographic techniques such as cryptographic hash, public/private keys and session keys.
Hence these guarantees are constrained by the strengths of the cryptographic algorithms actually used.When the initiator sends the request, it generates a nonce r 1 and a session key k session .
The initiator then generates a header containing the nonce, session key and the initiator's public key.
The header is then encrypted using the responder's public key.
Similarly, the responder includes the nonce in the header for the response and encrypts this header with the initiator's public key.
Thus the nonce and session key always remain confidential.
MSG always encrypts the data and nonce, using the session key.
Since the session keys are not reused, encrypting the data with session keys helps thwart dictionary attacks.
Thus confidentiality is maintained.The header, hdr always contains a cryptographic hash signed by the private key of the sender (initiator in case of requests and responder in case of responses).
The cryptographic hash is computed over MSG and the required fields of hdr and is signed by the sender's private key.
This signed cryptographic hash has several uses.
It allows the receiver to verify the correspondence between a given MSG and its MSG HDR.
The signed cryptographic hash helps the receiver detect if an adversary changed the contents of the message or the nonce.
Similarly, when an initiator receives a response, the initiator can verify that the response originated from the responder, because the cryptographic hash is signed by the responder's private key.
Thus an adversary cannot masquerade as the responder.
Likewise, the nonce contained within each header and data message can be used by the initiator to detect a replay of a response.
Likewise, if the responder keeps track of nonce values of the past requests, it can detect the replay of requests.
We have presented MuON, a protocol for providing mutual anonymity in dynamic P2P networks.
The contributions of MuON are twofold; the protocol provides reliable mutually anonymous communication over dynamic P2P networks, while maintaining low bandwidth and processing overhead; and it exhibits application friendly characteristics such as bounded communication latency and message integrity and confidentiality.
Since network outages can be modeled as churn, we believe that MuON provides resilient communication between initiator and responder.In the future, we plan to incorporate a cover traffic scheme in order to enhance MuON's anonymity guarantees.
We also plan to investigate the use of MuON for creating censorship resistant services and 'Denial-of-Service' (DoS) resistant services.
