The integration of bibliographical information of scholarly publications available on the Internet is an important task in academic research.
Accurate reference metadata extraction for scholarly publications is essential for the integration of information from heterogeneous reference sources.
In this paper, we propose a knowledge-based approach to literature mining and focus on reference metadata extraction methods for scholarly publications.
We adopt an ontological knowledge representation framework called INFOMAP to automatically extract the reference metadata.
The experimental results show that, by using INFOMAP, we can extract author, title, journal, volume, number (issue), year, and page information from different reference styles with a high degree of accuracy.
The overall average field accuracy of citation extraction for a Bioinformatics dataset is 97.87% for six reference styles.
.
The integration of bibliographical information of scholarly publications available on the Internet is an important task in academic research.
Accurate reference metadata extraction for scholarly publications is essential for the integration of information from the available heterogeneous reference sources, where metadata is defined as structured data about data [2].
In this paper, reference metadata refers to the sub-fields of references or citations.Automatic citation extraction is difficult due to variations between field separators.
For example, the author and title fields can be separated by spaces or periods; while the volume and issue fields can be separated by braces or parentheses [1].
Within fields, further separator issues are caused by punctuation and spacing differences.
To further compound the problem, there are many dramatically different citation styles (i.e., different field orders).
Some systems attempt to extract citation information from digital document references [3,5,8,9,12,15,16].
CiteSeer [8,9,12] is an example of an automatic citation indexing system that indexes academic literature in electronic formats.
It uses machine learning techniques to identify various forms of citations of the same paper.
Chowdhury [3] and Ding et al. [5], on the other hand, use a template mining approach for the extraction of citations from digital documents.In this paper, we propose a knowledge-based Reference Metadata Extraction (RME) method for scholarly publications.
The ontology we adopt, INFOMAP, is a knowledge representation framework that extracts important citation concepts from a natural language text [17,18].
A powerful feature of INFOMAP is its capability to represent and match complicated template structures, such as hierarchical matching, regular expressions, semantic template matching, frame (nonlinear relations) matching, and graph matching.
Using INFOMAP, we can extract author, title, journal, volume, number (issue), year, and page information from different kinds of reference formats or styles.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
Section 2 describes the proposed approach.
Section 3 discusses the experimental results.
In Section 4, we compare our approach with related works.
Finally, in Section 5, we present our conclusions and directions for future research.
There are four phases in the system framework of our knowledge-based RME for scholarly publications: (1) Reference Data Collection, (2) Knowledge Representation in INFOMAP, (3) Reference Metadata Extraction, and (4) Knowledge-based Reference Metadata Extraction -online service.
Figure 1 shows the system framework of knowledge-based RME for scholarly publications.
Figure 1.
The system framework of knowledgebased RME.
We describe the four phases of the system framework in the following sub-sections.
In the data collection stage, we use Journal Spider (a journal agent) to collect journal data from the Journal Citation Reports (JCR) indexed by the ISI and digital libraries on the Web.
The major part of the citation data is taken from the ISI web of science, DBLP, Citeseer, and PubMed.
We then cache the data (around 160,000 records) in the reference database as the knowledge representation data source.
In the knowledge representation stage, we use Compass as the knowledge editing tool for RME in INFOMAP [17,18].
INFOMAP is an ontological knowledge representation framework that provides an integrated environment for extracting important citation concepts from a reference.
The format of INFOMAP is a tree-like knowledge representation scheme that organizes knowledge of reference concepts in a hierarchical fashion.
An example of knowledge representation for knowledgebased RME in INFOMAP is shown in Figure 2.
We represent the basic knowledge of reference concepts in INFOMAP to extract the author, title, journal, volume, issue, year, and page information from different types of reference styles.
As there are many reference styles in scholarly publications, citations of an article can be given in dramatically different formats.
Table 1 Or it could be formatted in the IEEE style as: [1] T. Davenport, D. DeLong, and M. Beers, "Successful knowledge management projects," Sloan Management Review, vol.
39, no. 2, pp. 43-57, 1998.
There are several ways to separate fields that have different kinds of reference styles.
For example, the author field and title field can be separated by periods or commas.
Within fields, further separator issues occur because of different uses of punctuation, such as periods, commas, colons, semi-colons, question marks, and spacing.Nevertheless, we can still extract tagged field information from different formats of reference data.
In the reference information extraction stage, we use INFOMAP and the Alignment Reference Citation Agent to extract author, title, journal, volume, number (issue), year, and page information from different kinds of reference formats.
There are three parts to the online web system of knowledge-based RME for scholarly publications: (1) the system input area for journal publication references; (2) the system output of RME; and (3) BibTeX format output for data exchange and integration.1.
The system input of the knowledge-based reference metadata extraction for scholarly Publications is shown in Figure 3.
The system output of RME is shown in Figure 4.
Figure 4.
The system output of the knowledge-based RME 3.
The system output of BibTex Format is shown in Figure 5.
Users can input the plain text of a journal publication reference that is in different citation styles into the system.
The online system will automatically extract author, title, journal, volume, number (issue), year, and page metadata from the different reference styles and output the BibTex format for data exchange and integration.
Figure 6 shows the online service of knowledge-based RME.
The experimental results of knowledge-based metadata extraction for scholarly publications are presented below.
We used EndNote to collect Bioinformatics citation data for 2004 from PubMed (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/).
A total of 907 bibliography records were collected from PubMed digital libraries on the Web.
Reference testing data was generated for each of the six reference styles (BIOI, ACM, IEEE, APA, MISQ, and JCB).
We then randomly selected 500 records for testing from each of the six reference styles.In this experiment, we consider a field to be correctly extracted only when the field values in the reference testing data are correctly extracted.
The accuracy of citation extraction is defined as follows: The performance measure we define here is the field accuracy, which is different from word accuracy and instance accuracy defined in [14].
Figure 7 summarizes the experimental results of citation extraction for the six different reference styles.
The overall average accuracy of citation extraction for the six styles is 97.87%.
The best overall average accuracy is 98.20% for the MISQ style.
In particular, the average accuracy of the journal field is 99.77% for the six styles, and the individual accuracy of the MISQ reference style is 100%.
These results indicate that our method is quite reliable.
Figure 7.
Experimental results of citation extraction from six reference styles Figure 8 shows the results of the selected reference database experiment.
The results show that by using INFOMAP, we can extract author, title, journal, volume, number (issue), year, and page information from different reference styles with a high degree of precision.
There are punctuation and spacing differences between field separators in the structure of reference styles.
For example, the structures used between the volume and issue fields are difficult in the APA style and the IEEE style.
The volume and issue fields are separated by parentheses in the APA style, where as a comma is used in the IEEE style.To estimate the generality of our approach, we randomly selected more than 30 styles to test our method.
Table 2 summarizes the analysis of field relation structure.
For example, there are two possible field relation structures for the author field.
One is "<Author><Year>", which accounts for 54.29%; and the other is "<Author><Title>", which accounts for 42.8%.
However, the most common sequence structure of reference styles is "<Author> <Year> <Title> <Journal> <Volume> <Issue> <Pages>".
We conducted experiments on the other 30 styles without additional knowledge editing and obtained an average accuracy of reference extraction of approximately 87% for those styles.
In particular, the overall average accuracy of reference extraction is 88.20% for the MLA Style.
The experimental results show that our knowledgebased method is reliable for different kinds of unseen reference styles.Thirteen types of punctuation that can be used in some fields for different reference styles.
For example, a comma can be used in author, volume, issue, and page fields.
It can also used as the major field separator for the reference styles of BIOI, ACM, IEEE, APA, MISQ, and JCB; while the major field separator in the JCB style is a period.We use templates in INFOMAP to represent the punctuation differences between field separators in the structure of reference styles.
Extensive works on extracting citations information from digital document references have been reported in the literature [3,5,8,9,12,14,15].
In this section, we compare related works that are based on machine learning models and rule-based models.First, a machine learning approach such as Citeseer [8,9,12] takes advantage of probabilistic estimation, which is based on the training sets of tagged bibliographical data, to boost performance.
The citation parsing technique of Citeseer can identify titles and authors with approximately 80% accuracy and page numbers with approximately 40% accuracy [8].
Seymore et al. [15] use the Hidden Markov Model (HMM) to extract important fields from the headers of computer science research papers, and achieved an overall word accuracy of 92.9%.
Peng et al. [14] employ Conditional Random Fields (CRF) to extract various common fields from the headers and citations of research papers.
The overall word accuracy is 98.3% for extracting fields from paper headers.
The reference dataset they use is the Cora dataset [14], which contains 500 references categorized into 13 fields: author, title, editor, book_title, date, journal, volume, tech, institution, pages, location, publisher, and note.
Peng et al. [14] achieve an overall word accuracy of 85.1%(HMM) compared to 95.37%(CRF) and an overall instance accuracy of 10%(HMM) compared to 77.33%(CRF) for paper references.Second, rule-based models such as those developed by Chowdhury [3] and Ding et al. [5] use a template mining approach for citation extraction from digital documents.
Ding et al. [5] use three templates for extracting information from cited articles (citations) and obtain a quite satisfactory result (more than 90%) for the distribution of information extracted from each unit in cited articles.
The advantage of their rule-based model is its efficiency in extracting reference information.
However, they treat references in one style only from tagged texts (e.g., references formatted in HTML), whereas our method treats references in more than six reference styles from plain text.In contrast to the approaches that use a small amount of testing data, our proposed knowledge-based RME method for scholarly publications can extract reference information from 907 records in various reference styles with a high degree of precision (the overall average field accuracy is 97.87% for six major styles, 98.20% for the MISQ Style and 87% for 30 other randomly selected styles).
RME is a challenging problem due to the diverse nature of reference styles.
In this paper, we have proposed a knowledge-based RME method for scholarly publications.
The experimental results indicate that, by using INFOMAP, we can extract author, title, journal, volume, number (issue), year, and page information from different reference styles with a high degree of precision.
The overall average field accuracy of citation extraction is 97.87% for six reference styles.We highlight two major directions for future research, namely, ontology learning and machine learning.
The integration of knowledge acquisition with machinelearning techniques has already proved extremely beneficial for knowledge acquisition [6,10,11,13].
For ontology learning, there are two possible ways to acquire the concept relationship on ontology learning: (1) a prior approach: given domain documents, find all the conceptinstance pairs [7]; and (2) an online-testing approach: enumerate all possible concept-instance pairs and then evaluate the concept-instance pairs by a search engine.In the future, we will integrate both the ontological and the machine learning approaches (such as MaximumEntropy Method (MEM), Hidden Markov Model (HMM), Conditional Random Fields (CRF) and Support Vector Machines (SVM)) to boost the performance of citation information extraction and produce a more robust prototype that can deal with free style references as well as input containing errors.
This research was supported in part by the National Science Council under GRANT NSC93-2752-E-001-001.
