An e-Negotiation process comprises computer-facilitated tasks, each of which aims at resolving an issue or a collection of co-related issues under negotiation.
It involves an iterative decision process in which two or more parties make individual decisions and interact with each other, aiming to arrive at a contract.
In each iterative decision process, a party makes offers or counter offers that may reflect tradeoffs of some issues.
Tradeoff evaluation often requires logrolling, which refers to the exchange of loss in some issues for gain in others.
The set of issues involved in a logrolling process is referred to as a logrolling set.
A typical negotiation involves multiple logrolling processes.
The logrolling sets exercised by a negotiation party in these processes constitute one logrolling view.
Problems arise when parties have unmatched logrolling views.
Alternative offers or counter offers that refer to one logrolling view can be difficult to interpret under a different logrolling view.
In this paper, motivated by an e-Negotiation example of a lease contract template, we formulate a meta-model of unmatched logrolling views, examine the involved e-Negotiation process, and propose a mechanism for building an e-Negotiation Support System (eNSS) to facilitate the process, without the need of formulating utility functions.
As a result, e-Negotiation across parties with unmatched logrolling views can be streamlined.
A contract is a binding agreement between two or more parties, defining the set of obligations and rewards in a business process.
Contracts are important for attaining business process interoperability and enforcing their proper enactment, because they reduce uncertainty associated with the interactions among organizations.
In USA (Robinson 1997), the federal government spends about USD$200 billion annually buying goods and services from over 300,000 vendors.
A typical supermarket chain requires negotiating contracts of over 50,000 product items annually.
It is obvious that contract negotiation is a very important activity in business processes.Negotiation is a decision process in which two or more parties make individual decisions and interact with each other for mutual gain (Thompson 1998).
Proposals are sent to the other parties, and a new proposal may be generated after receiving a counter proposal.
The process continues until an agreement or a deadlock is reached, or even one or more parties quit.
Each party needs to determine reactions of the other parties and obtain their responses.
Each party also needs to estimate the outcomes that the other parties would like to achieve.
Whereas each party has its own utility function (Stigum and Wenstop 1983), they tend to be ignorant of the others' values and strategies, especially in a noncooperative environment.
As a result, negotiations may involve high transaction costs and do not always reach the best solution.Negotiation of contracts involves two or more parties multilaterally bargaining for mutual gain in order to achieve a mutual beneficial agreement, but each of them has conflicting interests.
The Internet has recently become a global common platform where organizations and individuals communicate among each other to carry out various commercial activities and to provide valueadded services.
As many business activities are automated as electronic transactions, negotiation of contracts between human becomes a bottleneck.
A major problem of this is its slowness, which is further complicated by issues of culture, ego and pride (Thompson 1998).
With the growing acceptance of eCommerce, this problem can be much alleviated using e-Negotiation ( Hung and Mao 2002).
An e-Negotiation comprises computer-facilitated tasks, each of which aims at resolving an issue or a collection of co-related issues under negotiation.
It involves an iterative decision process in which two or more parties make individual decisions and interact with each other aiming to arrive at a contract.An e-Contract, which naturally follows a successful e-Negotiation, is the computerized facilitation or automation of a contract in a cross-organizational business process.
As current trends in e-commerce accelerate the widespread use of e-Contracts in the business world (Nabil and Yesha 1996), the ability of an e-commerce system to quickly create mutually beneficial e-Contracts becomes a critical success factor for organizations.
An automated e-Contract negotiation system should conduct negotiation to create value by interacting with different parties to create mutually acceptable deals.
This is particularly applicable to standard business interactions that could take place over the Internet, such as real-estate transactions, purchase and sale of goods, etc.
New contracts for these business interactions are typically defined based on standard contract templates.
Specific business interactions not covered by the clauses in standard contract templates can be provided as contract variations or contract escalations.
A contract template is the reference document based on which a new contract is negotiated.
A contract template consists of a number of contract clauses, each addressing a specific concern in the business interaction.
Each contract clause contains a set of template variables whose values are to be negotiated.
Figure 1 gives an example of a contract clause in a lease contract template.
In each iterative decision process of e-Negotiation, a party makes offers or counter offers reflecting tradeoffs of some issues.
In the context of contract templates, an issue corresponds to a template variable ( Cheung et al. 2002).
Tradeoff evaluation often requires logrolling, which refers to the exchange of loss in some issues for gain in others (Tajima and Fraser 1998).
The set of issues (or template variables) involved in logrolling constitute a logrolling set.
For instance, the issues regarding the amount of deposit and the rent could constitute a logrolling view if a party offers to exchange loss in the issue of deposit for gain in the issue of rent.Referring to the above example, e-Negotiation involves the evaluation of several variables and of several possible values per variable.
As a result, a large combination of values has to be evaluated by decisionmakers in each e-Negotiation iterative decision process.
The evaluation of a large combination of variables is time consuming and could be difficult for decision makers from a cognitive perspective.
The partitioning of issues into logrolling sets allows decisions to be evaluated and made in a stepwise fashion so that potential tradeoffs can be effectively recognized.
In addition, Foroughi and Jelassi (1990) have a similar perspective.
A typical negotiation involves multiple logrolling processes.
The logrolling sets exercised by a negotiation party in these processes constitute one logrolling view.
However, problems arise when parties have different sets of logrolling views.
Alternative offers or counter offers that refer to one logrolling view can be difficult to interpret under a different logrolling view.
In this paper, motivated by an e-Negotiation example based on a lease contract template, we formulate a meta-model of unmatched logrolling views, examine the involved e-Negotiation process, and propose a mechanism for building an e-Negotiation Support System (eNSS) to facilitate the process, without the need of utility functions.
As a result, e-Negotiation across parties with different logrolling views can be streamlined.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes a motivating example.
Section 3 presents a conceptual model for e-Negotiation and eContracts.
This is followed by a methodology in Section 4 to conduct tradeoff evaluation with unmatched logrolling views.
Next, Section 5 discusses related works.
Lastly, Section 6 discusses the conclusion and future work.
template.
Although the motivating example involves only two parties, the framework we discussed in this paper is applicable to multiple parties.
In this motivating example, both parties have different tradeoff evaluation model as reflected by their individual logrolling views.
The upper and lower halves represent the individual logrolling view of a landlord and a tenant, respectively.
Let us first examine the landlord's logrolling view.
The primary concern of the landlord is to rent the property out as soon as possible since it is already vacant.
Therefore, the landlord is willing to exchange a reduction in rent for an early start of the lease.
The issue Basic Rent and Start Date therefore form a logrolling set.
In each e-Negotiation iterative decision process, this logrolling set is the first amongst the others to be evaluated by the landlord.
The additional allowance required for the provision of facilities (such as refrigerator, air conditioners and washing machines) or inclusion of management fee can be evaluated with reference to the Basic Rent.
For instance, the landlord requires an addition of $1,000 to the Basic Rent if management fee is included.
However, the tenant may concern more on the lease period because of several reasons.
For example, his current employment contract will be expired in a year.
He wants to leave flexibility for relocation after one year and is willing to exchange a higher rent for a lease of shorter period.
This is modeled by the logrolling set containing period and Basic Rent.
This logrolling set is the first amongst the others to be evaluated by the tenant in each e-Negotiation iterative decision process.
In real life, parties tend to insist on using the evaluation model that they are most familiar, based on their concerns and past experience.
This necessitates the support of unmatched logrolling views in e-Negotiations.
We say that parties have unmatched logrolling views if they have different logrolling sets.
For example, the logrolling views of the landlord and the tenant in the motivating example are unmatched.The template variables (e.g., Period), which appear in a lease contract template, are printed in non-italic.
The italic ones (e.g. Facilities Allowance) are referred to as auxiliary variables, which are introduced to facilitate tradeoff evaluation during the negotiation process.
These auxiliary variables are to be evaluated together with the related template variables.
As such, a logrolling set contains both template and auxiliary variables, which are to be logrolled.
Detailed discussion on auxiliary variables can be found in ( Cheung et al. 2002).
Further, we do believe that an e-Contract negotiation system should also depict an entire e-Contract template so that negotiators can logroll among template variables, focusing on tradeoffs among these instead of arguing about single variables.
Figure 3 presents the e-Negotiation conceptual model and its relationships to the e-Contract conceptual model in Unified Modeling Language (UML), which is a standard language for object-oriented modeling (OMG 2001).
A contract may contain a number of template variables, such as the Rent and Period in a lease contract.
Each negotiation party expresses their reservation prices of these variables.
These prices are to be resolved in negotiation.
Auxiliary variables are not parts of a contract but introduced to facilitate e-Negotiation and tradeoff evaluations.
There are various kinds of relations among these variables.
For instance, a template variable precedes another variable if the former is to be negotiated before the latter.
We say that a set of variables indivisibly relates to each other if they are in the same logrolling set.
A negotiation process is made up of tasks, each of which aims at resolving an issue or a collection of corelated issues.
For instance, issues in the lease example are facilities provision, inclusion of management fee, start dates of the lease and the deposit to be paid by the tenant.
Each of these issues maps to a set of template and auxiliary variables.
For instance, the issue of facilities provision can be mapped to two variables Facilities and Facilities Allowance.
While Facilities is a template variable representing the provision of facilities in a lease, Facilities Allowance is an auxiliary variable to indicate the additional amount required if facilities are to be provided in the lease.
Facilities Allowance is a part of Rent.
Its introduction helps the landlord to determine the Rent.
In our approach, a party does not need to be aware of the auxiliary variables introduced by its counterparty.
0-7695-1874-5/03 $17.00 (C) 2003 IEEEAn issue may be logrolled with other issues.
For instance, a landlord may logroll the issues of facilities provision and lease period if a long lease is the condition to facilities provision.
These logrolling issues collectively form a logrolling set.
Unmatched logrolling views occur when each party has different combinations of logrolling sets, as we will discuss in Section 4.
Figure 4 depicts our e-Negotiation process in UML activity diagram.
Each party has to participate in each constituting activity of the process.
The e-Negotiation process either leads to a successful creation of an eContract; otherwise leads to nothing.
When an eNegotiation process starts, it triggers two parallel activities.
One activity is to identify issues and define the criteria to be adopted in the e-Negotiation process.
For instance, the landlord may set criteria on the minimum rent such as $20,000 (in Hong Kong Dollars) and on the minimum lease period such as one year.
Then, the sets of logrolling issues are identified and refined with the introduction of necessary auxiliary variables.
Relations between auxiliary variables and template variables are specified.
For example, the template variable Rent is a sum of three auxiliary variables Basic Rent, Facilities Allowance and Mgt Fee Allowance.
Issues are mapped to collections of auxiliary and template variables.
Variables to which an issue or a collection of logrolling issues is mapped constitute a logrolling set.
Each party makes offers and counter offers in turn to attain a set of acceptable reservation prices for these variables.
In real-life, parties need to arrive at an agreed negotiation plan before contract negotiation (Hung and Mao 2002).
Furthermore, the plan, which may not often be captured precisely in oneshot, must be consistent with the inter-relationships among the variables ( Cheung et al. 2002).
As mentioned in Section 2, tradeoff evaluation often requires logrolling, which is most effective if this can be conducted based on the logrolling view held by each individual party.
Each logrolling view represents the tradeoff evaluation model of a negotiation party.
To facilitate evaluation, a party may introduce auxiliary variables to a logrolling set.
For example, three auxiliary variables (Basic Rent, Facilities Allowance and Mgt Fee Allowance) are introduced to facilitate tradeoff evaluation covering basic terms, inclusion of facilities and inclusion of management fee, respectively.
Each of these auxiliary variables constitutes a part of Rent.
However, unlike template variables, such as Rent, auxiliary variables do not appear in contract templates and their introduction is a party's own decision.
As such, there could be different interpretations on auxiliary variables across negotiation parties.
For instance, the landlord ties the Basic Rent to the date when the lease may start, while the tenant ties it to the period of the lease.
In fact, as each party may also have a different set of auxiliary variables, exchanges of these auxiliary variable values may not be meaningful.Unlike auxiliary variables, template variables are derived directly from a contract template.
Negotiation parties therefore share a common set of template variables and the interpretation on these variables.
While tradeoffs are evaluated based on a logrolling set, offers can be exchanged in an aggregated view, which contains only template variables.
As such, e-Negotiation involves a methodology to aggregate the values specified in the logrolling sets held by one party and to dissect these aggregated values into the logrolling sets held by another party.
The mechanism is facilitated by an e-Negotiation Support System (eNSS).
Each party runs a copy of eNSS, which exchanges aggregated values with the eNSSs of counter-party as shown in Figure 5.
Let us first revisit the lease contract example with further details and then elaborate the methodology.
Figure 6 shows the logrolling view and reservation prices held by the landlord.
Since the property is vacant, the landlord is eager to let it out as soon as possible andPeriod Basic Ren t 1 yr 18K 2 yrs 17K Start Date Facilities Facilities Allowance 1M In cluded 2K 2M In cluded 2K 2M Excluded 0 3M Excluded 0 Mgt Fee Mgt Fee All o wan ce Excluded 0 In cluded 1K Start Date Basic Ren t 1M 1 9K 2M 20K 3M 2 1K Facilities Period Faci lities Allowance Excluded 1 yr 0 Included 2 yrs 2K Mgt Fee Mgt Fee Allowance Excluded 0 Included 1K Start Date Facilities Lease Period Mgt Fee Rent 1M Excluded 1 yr Excluded 19K 1M Excluded 1 yr Included 20K 1M Included 2 yrs Excluded 21K 1M Included 2 yrs Included 22K 2M Excluded 1 yr Excluded 20K 2M Excluded 1 yr Included 21K 2M Included 2 yrs Excluded 22K 2M Included 2 yrs Included 23K 3M Excluded 1 yr Excluded 21K 3M Excluded 1 yr Included 22K 3M Included 2 yrs Excluded 23K 3M Included 2 yrs Included 24K Logrolling Sets Logrolling Sets Aggregated View e-Negotiation Support System (eNSS Proceedings of the 36th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences -20030-7695-1874-5/03 $17.00 (C) 2003 IEEEoffers a monthly Basic Rent as low as 19K if the lease can start within one month.
A higher Basic Rent of 20K and 21K is required should the lease starts within two and three months, respectively.
On top of the basic terms, provision of facilities and inclusion of management fees are possible if the tenant pays an additional allowance of 2K and 1K, respectively.
However, the landlord requires a lease period of two years, should provision of facilities are included.
As such, there is no reservation price for the inclusion of facilities and a lease period of one year.
Note that the landlord does not need to specify reservation prices for all possible combinations of issues.
The three tables reflect the logrolling view used by the landlord to evaluate tradeoffs.
Each logrolling set is represented in a Mgt Fee Mgt Fee Allowance Excluded 0 Included 1K In addition to specifying reservation prices at the logrolling sets, a party also needs to define a set of relations R, mapping auxiliary variables in the logrolling sets to the associate template variables.
In this lease example, the template variable Rent is related to the auxiliary variables Basic Rent, Facilities Allowance and Mgt Fee Allowance using the following formula:R l : Rent = Basic Rent + Facilities Allowance + Mgt Fee Allowance When the landlord is satisfied with the reservation prices specified at a favorite logrolling view, an aggregated view can be constructed based on the Cartesian product of his/her logrolling sets, where the template variable Rent is a lump sum of the values in the related auxiliary variables.
In general, given a set of N logrolling sets L 1 , …, L N , an aggregated view can be constructed by applying a function f R upon the Cartesian product of L i , where i = 1, ..., N and f R converts auxiliary variables into template variables based on a set of relations R. Start Hereafter, let us represent the table entries generated by the negotiation tool eNSS in italic fonts.
Figure 7 gives the aggregated view computed from the landlord's logrolling sets given in Figure 6 and the relation R l above.
This aggregated view, representing a landlord's offer, is sent to the tenant for evaluation Before examining the mechanism of offer matching, let us consider the reservation prices at the tenant side.
Suppose the potential tenant prefers a shorter lease to allow for relocation after a year.
He is willing to pay a higher monthly Basic Rent of 18K for a one-year lease contract, but only 17K for a two-year period.
The tenant is able to start the lease within a month, should the landlord provide the facilities.
The tenant does not mind paying facilities allowance up to 2K.
The provision of facilities can be optional if the lease starts within two Proceedings of the 36th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences -2003 0-7695-1874-5/03 $17.00 (C) 2003 IEEEmonths.
Should the lease start within three months; the tenant would like to buy the facilities himself.
A management fee allowance of 1K can be added to the Basic Rent if management fee is included.
Like the case of the landlord, the tenant needs to specify a set of relations mapping his auxiliary variables to the template variables.
In general, each party may define its own set of relations although R l and R t are the same in our lease example.
An aggregated view as shown in Figure 9 can be computed based on the reservation prices given by the tenant in Figure 8.
Since the aggregated view of the landlord's offer contains only reservation prices of the template variables, these prices may not be directly mapped to the logrolling view of the tenant, which consists of the tenant's own auxiliary variables We explain the construction of an offer matching table and its utilization for tradeoff evaluation based on the tenant's logrolling view as shown in Figure 9.
The offer-matching table is an internal data structure of the e-Negotiation system.
It is transparent to the negotiation parties, who concern mainly with the evaluation and specification of reservation prices at their own logrolling views.
At the tenant side, an offermatching table can be constructed based on the offers by the landlord and the tenant.
The offer-matching table is derived in the following steps.
Table Figure 10 gives an offer-matching table computed from the aggregated view of the landlord and that of the tenant.
An additional column Rentdiff is inserted in order to show the differences between Rentlandlord and Renttenant.
Matching offers are found if Rentdiff contains zero or negative values.
If so, the e-Negotiation process has attained a reachable state; otherwise a difference table is computed.
Note that the offer-matching table may consist of not applicable (N/A) entries, as some combinations are not available in either the landlord's offer or the tenant's offer.
For example, the first two entries in Renttenant do not have applicable values because the tenant requires the inclusion of facilities if the lease is to be started within a month.
A party starts tradeoff evaluation when the underlying eNSS determines no acceptable offers.
A party selects a logrolling set that he would like to first evaluate the tradeoffs.
For instance, the tenant first selects the view [Period, Basic Rent] due to the strong preference of a shorter lease.
In our proposed methodology, a party may start tradeoff evaluation at any logrolling set, which may even vary across different rounds of negotiation.
Once a view is selected, the party is presented with the minimum difference between his reservation price and that of his counter-party.
For instance, Figure 11 shows the additional column, Min Difference, computed by the underlying negotiation support system when the tenant has selected the view [Period, Basic Rent].
The minimum difference is calculated from the minimum Rentdiff amongst the records from the offer matching table, where Period = 1 or Period = 2.
If the party decides not to make any revision in that logrolling set, it may select either another logrolling set for tradeoff evaluation or an entry to be revised in the logrolling set.
Suppose the tenant now revises his reservation price to, say, 19K.
The underlying system updates the corresponding entries in the offer matching table and a new minimum difference as shown in Figure 12.
The field Min Difference indicates the minimum amount to revise in order to meet the landlord's asking prices.
Here, Min Difference is computed under the assumption that Period = 1 year and Basic Rent = 19K.
The last two entries represent the combinations that are found from the counter party's offer (i.e., landlord) but have not yet been considered by the tenant.
...Start Date Facilities Facilities Allowance Min Difference 1M Included 2K N/A 2M Included 2K N/A 2M Excluded 0 1K 3M Excluded 0 2K 1M Excluded N/A N/A 3M Included N/A N/A[Period = 1yr, Basic Rent =18K] (cf. Figure 14) ... Suppose after the tradeoff evaluation exercise, the tenant makes two changes in the [Period, Basic Rent] view: (a) revising the Basic Rent from 18K to 19K for a lease period of 1 year and (b) revising the Basic Rent from 17K to 18K for a lease period of two years.
Note that, the tenant may still choose not to examine the two new combinations available in the landlord's offer as indicated in the last two entries in Figure 13.
The revised reservation prices in terms of logrolling sets are shown in Figure 16.
The revised logrolling sets are then aggregated with a lump sum value in Rent and submitted to the landlord as a counter offer.
The aggregated view is shown in Figure 17.
Similarly, the landlord performs tradeoff evaluations based on the tenant's submitted aggregated view ( Figure 17) and makes any necessary revisions to reservation prices.
Suppose the landlord is willing to lower the monthly Basic Rent by 1K.
Figure 18 gives the landlord's revised offer.
As a result, there are four sets of accepted values, which are summarized in Figure 19.
The e-Negotiation process has attained a reachable state, leaving both parties mutually settled on one set of accepted values.
On the other hand, negotiation failure occurs if all parties refuse to revise their reservation values and there is no solution across these reservation values.
Modeling of e-contracts can be dated back to the Contract Net Protocol (Smith 1980 Karlaplem and et al. (2001) have proposed a meta-model of e-contracts with entityrelationship diagrams for generating workflows to support e-contract enactment.
But they have not considered the notion of logrolling views or commitments in e-contracts.
On the other hand, we have done some work on e-Contract enactment ( Chiu et al. 2002) and e-contract enforcement ( ).
We have ( Cheung et al. 2002) also made a study on the details of variable relations within the context of contract templates and proposed a mechanism for negotiation plan generation.
In addition, Griffel et al. (1997) presents an application of contract negotiation by mobile agents.
A contract is represented as an object that can be accessed by the negotiation partners.
Each negotiation partner has the opportunity to change or insert clauses.
They only provide a conceptual view of their approach and do not describe any formal logical model to support their approach.
Further, Tan and Thoen (2002) proposed a conceptual view to represent the contents of business contracts with Formal Language for Business Communication (FLBC) for contract negotiation based on the event semantics.
However, they do not provide any conceptual and logical model to model the negotiation of contracts.
Yu and Mylopoulus (1996) consider dependencies of business goals but not down to practical details of variable dependencies of contract negotiation.
In summary, none of these researches considers the logrolling process.In political sciences, logrolling means the trading of votes by legislators (Wilson 1969).
For example, a legislator offers to another to trade his vote on a certain bill in return for the other's votes on a second and a third bill.
After it, logrolling (Froman and Cohen 1970) is defined as one-actor trades a concession on one or more issues for reciprocal concessions on other issues with his bargaining opponent.
In general, negotiators have cognitive biases (Foroughi and Jelassi 1990), i.e., negotiators tend to consider issues one at one time that is also called compromise (Froman and Cohen 1970), because it is cognitively difficult for negotiators to integrate multiple issues into a single package.
Beside the area of political sciences, not much research work in logrolling has been done in other research areas such as Operation Research (OR) and Information Systems (IS).
This paper is applying this concept into an e-commerce application.
In this paper, motivated by a lease contract template example, we have proposed a pragmatic approach to eNegotiation based on e-Contract templates.
Tradeoff evaluation in e-Negotiation often requires logrolling, which refers to the exchange of loss in some issues for gain in others.
The set of issues involved in a logrolling process is referred to as a logrolling set.
Problems arise when parties have different combinations of logrolling sets.
Alternative offers or counter offers that refer to one combination can be difficult to interpret under a different combination.
Furthermore, we have formulated a meta-model of unmatched logrolling views, examined the involved e-Negotiation process, and proposed a mechanism to facilitate the process.Furthermore, facilitated by E-ADOME WFMS ( Chiu et al. 1999Chiu et al. , 2001Chiu et al. , 2002), a prototype eNegotiation system can be built rapidly, supporting the cross-organizational process via contemporary Internet technologies ( Cheung et al. 2003).
With such a solid and convenient platform, we are prototyping an eNegotiation system based on the techniques developed in this paper.
In particular, we are using the lease contract template as our primary test application.
There are two major reasons that traditional Operations Research approaches such as utility functions and normative models cannot be applied into this research problem.
First of all, utility functions are very sensitive to negotiators.
Therefore, it is extremely difficult and almost impractical in reality to obtain the utility functions from negotiators during negotiation (Soo 2000).
Second, normative models can provide compelling analyses of rational behavior in competitive situations.
However, normative models (Thompson 1998) do not adequately describe the behavior of most negotiators in the negotiation activity.
It is because negotiators do not always behave according to principles of normative models.
Therefore, this paper introduces a feasible approach to build such an eContract negotiation system.
This work can be expanded in several directions.
We are currently investigating one-to-many (more than two parties at one time) negotiation of contract.
We are also interested in the role of negotiation mediators (especially real-estate brokers and agents) and applications in customer relationship management ( , and how our current solution can help them, because this is a large business in Hong Kong.
For applications, we are also interested in sales contracts of real estates, supply chain and investment.
In addition, we are investigating the ranking of different types of issues and criteria (Brams and Kilgour 2001) for logrolling issues.
