We address the problem of predicting links and link change in friends networks and introduce a new supervised learning method for both types of prediction.
This extends previous based on directed graph features such as the indegree of candidate friends and pair dependent relational features such as common interests.
In this new work, we consider how differential user data, such as that produced using regular crawls from a social network site, can be used to produce a time series with which we can identify prediction problems over both links and link change.
A key issue we address is the rarity of change between two successive versions of a social network, resulting in severe imbalance between positive and negative examples of change.
We compare existing approaches towards coping with this problem, present positive results on new crawls of LiveJournal, and consider how temporal data can enhance the relational link mining process.
INTRODUCTION The problem of predicting links between entities such as users and communities in a friends network can be treated as one of supervised inductive learning for classification.
In previous work (Hsu et al. 2007), we introduced a system for classifying pairs of users who were known to lie within a radius of 2 of one another as friends or friends of friends.
This classification task was defined on a data sets consisting of 1000 and 4000 users from the blog service LiveJournal.
Analysis of the graph structure and pair-dependent sets (e.g., mutual friends and common interests) produced a set of 12 features for each candidate pair.
From this set of features, an effective predictor for link existence could be learned.
However, there were two key limitations to this approach.
First, the features made available to machine learning algorithms included certain information that is not always available for prediction tasks.
For example, in many social networks such as Facebook and LinkedIn, a user who has been added to the friend set of another is prompted for whether to issue a reciprocal link, whereas realistic prediction may require link existence to be identified before such information is known.
Thus, some latency is inherent in realistic prediction task specifications.
Second, a key unaddressed problem in this and other related work is that treating link existence as a function of a single snapshot of the friends network fails to take into account the full history of the graph.
We show in this paper that data about changes to the link structure over time can provide an effective The problem of predicting links between entities such as users and communities in a friends network can be treated as one of supervised inductive learning for classification.
In previous work ( Hsu et al. 2007), we introduced a system for classifying pairs of users who were known to lie within a radius of 2 of one another as friends or friends of friends.
This classification task was defined on a data sets consisting of 1000 and 4000 users from the blog service LiveJournal.
Analysis of the graph structure and pair-dependent sets (e.g., mutual friends and common interests) produced a set of 12 features for each candidate pair.
From this set of features, an effective predictor for link existence could be learned.
However, there were two key limitations to this approach.
First, the features made available to machine learning algorithms included certain information that is not always available for prediction tasks.
For example, in many social networks such as Facebook and LinkedIn, a user who has been added to the friend set of another is prompted for whether to issue a reciprocal link, whereas realistic prediction may require link existence to be identified before such information is known.
Thus, some latency is inherent in realistic prediction task specifications.
Second, a key unaddressed problem in this and other related work is that treating link existence as a function of a single snapshot of the friends network fails to take into account the full history of the graph.
We show in this paper that data about changes to the link structure over time can provide an effective set of indicators for future change.
Therefore, we formulate the problem of link existence prediction in terms of predicting change, given the recent history of: graph topology, user features, and features of candidate friends.
This approach provides the features required for machine learning algorithms to be able to learn predictive cues about imminent change in link existence -i.e., addition and deletion of friendships.
Our experiments demonstrate that predictors learned from atemporal data tend to grossly oversimplify the conditions of link change, resulting in poor generalization quality.
By using temporal data, we capture both graph-based and user-based indicators of imminent link change, resulting in much higher prediction accuracy, precision, and recall.The novel contribution of this time series formulation is that it makes available the full information contained in regularly collected snapshots of a social network site.
This information, in turn, supports more robust learning to predict link change than for a single crawl.
In our original study of link prediction by classification ( Hsu et al. 2006), we defined a simple data model for a feature set (i.e., an attribute vector or tuple).
Each tuple corresponds to a candidate pair.
We first enumerated tuples of seven graph features such as indegree of candidate friend from LiveJournal's friends network, and augmented this schema with five relational attributes such as number of mutual interests.
This system precomputes data for supervised inductive learning whose objective is to classify candidate friendships based on observable features of the source entity u and a target entity v.
Some features, such as degree, were dependent on only u or only v; others, such as backward distance, were measured between v and u.
The most basic prediction task is to take as input an unlabeled instance (tuple of all 12 node-dependent and pair-dependent attributes) and label (u, v) as existing or not.
Ground truth, i.e., whether (u, v) 񮽙 E, is known.
We refer the interested reader to ( Hsu et al. 2007) for full documentation of these attributes and the inductive learning experiments conducted.
The link prediction problem has been studied as a classification problem (Popescul and Ungar 2003), with applications of relational link extraction by clustering becoming prevalent in recent research (Getoor and Diehl 2005).
Our technical objective in this new work was to extend the problem definition, from classification on static instances to classification of instances in a sequence as being examples of change or no change in link structure.
We henceforth refer to this problem as link change prediction.The key contribution of our original work ( Hsu et al. 2006) was that it identified a set of graph features that could be used to learn to classify two users known to lie within a radius of 2 of each other as being distance 1 apart (friends) or distance 2 apart (friends of friends).
The test set accuracy of decision surfaces learned using this data was in excess of 97% on 1000-node data sets, while the precision and recall were in excess of 80% each.
Limitations of this work were that it provided only a method for predicting whether two users were friends given that their entire set of mutual friends, the overall degree of both the initiating friend and receiving friend, and the reciprocity of the friendship.
This does not provide as fully realistic a training scenario as a real incremental crawl of a social networking site would, because for a typical u and v where the existence of (u, v) in the edge set E is being predicted, a) the candidates are not necessarily known to lie less than or equal to two nodes apart and b) it is not necessarily known whether (v, u) is already in E. (v, u) 񮽙 E is a triggering event for adding one friendship (or breaking others), and is employed in social networks that send notifications and prompt the user to choose whether to reciprocate, as is the case with Facebook (shown in Fig. 1), LinkedIn, and Flickr.
The key novel advance of the second work ( Hsu et al. 2007) was that it derived algorithms for computing graph features efficiently, in time quadratic in the number of nodes, i.e., O(kn) = O(k |V|), where k is the square of the average degree of a node in the friends network.
We bounded this number empirically to be between 20 and 30 on average for LiveJournal, although there are some "islands", i.e., users with indegree and outdegree 0.
Such users' profiles cannot be crawled due to their being in separate strongly connected components and due to LiveJournal's lack of random access to users' records by number.
The record for indegree was over 5000, held by iharthdarth, the author of a popular web comic.In the second paper, we still used the "distance 1 vs. 2" problem as a benchmark, but recognized the need for better tests.
In exploratory experiments at this time, we found that ab initio classification of user pairs by expected distance yielded poor results for the exact case, and mediocre results for learning an upper bound.
In addition to the classification approach of Popescul and Ungar (2003), we studied the SUBDUE system of Mukherjee and Holder (2004), which uses graph algorithms to find frequently occurring subgraphs as a preprocessing step for supervised inductive learning.
Bhattacharya and Getoor (2004) similarly use statistical relational learning from data to address the deduplication problem.Our approach to link mining is based on classical inducers for supervised learning, such as J48, Logistic Regression, and OneR (Holte 1993).
However, the learning framework introduced in (Hsu, et al. 2006), and extended in ( Hsu et al. 2007) and this work, is extensible to other approaches, such as the inductive logic programming (ILP) system compared against SUBDUE by Ketkar, Holder, and Cook (2005).
LJCrawler v3 is a multi-threaded, parallel HTTP crawler that effectively gathered user information in a breadth-first manner beginning with LiveJournal user darthvader, which was randomly selected.
Specifically, the crawler queried user data including, but not limited to, user age, interests, friends, schools, communities, etc.
Running on a single computer, LJCrawlerv3 is bounded by only by network capacity, and was shown to crawl at most 200 users per second.
Keeping within the LiveJournal terms of service, we limited the crawling capacity to generally five users per second.The crawler was run for a total of three hours every six hours for seven days from 00:00 CST on September 27, 2007, to 18:00 CST on October 03, 2007, for a total of 28 crawls.
We identified two prediction tasks -one based on a single feature set from a single run of LJCrawlerv3 and another based on all 28 crawls.
Both tasks shared the target concept of a newly-added friendship.
That is, a candidate pair (u, v) was labeled as positive if and only if (u, v) 񮽙 E t-1 and (u, v) 񮽙 E t .
Specifically, the first task (atemporal) was based on the friendships in the initial crawl from 00:00 CST on September 27, 2007, as compared to the friendships that existed in the final crawl at 18:00 CST on October 03, 2007.
Alternatively, the second task (temporal) was based on learning from the incremental differences between each successive pair out of the 28 crawls.
In order to learn from successive pairs, we structured the training features in the following manner:񮽙 , , , , 񮽙 , , , , 񮽙 , , , , 񮽙where 񮽙 is the feature tuple from the crawl at time t -k (k crawls ago).
The problem of imbalance between the frequency of positive and negative examples is endemic to change prediction in many domains.
For example, Kubat, Holte, and Matwin observed that certain anomaly detection problems such as detecting oil spills in satellite images involved a vastly greater number of negative examples than positive (1998).
Similarly, we encounter many more cases where a user neither adds nor deletes friends during a short period of a few days or weeks.
Anecdotally, users often delete friends as a regular mass action (such as a "friends cut") or add entire social groups or cliques upon their own arrival at a blog or social network service, or when a friend joins who is known offline to the user.The approach commonly taken to cope with imbalance is to downsample negative examples or upsample positive examples.
(Kubat and Matwin 1997).
Our approach effectively upsamples positive examples by taking all available instances of change: known additions of friends-links for users who were not friends previously, or retractions of links for users who were.
We then generate random cases (predominantly negative for "change") either according to a:1.
Fixed Ratio (FR), where the number of positive and negative cases is deliberately equalized, i.e., kept at a 1-to-1 ratio 2.
Fixed Count (FC), where the number of positive and negative cases are sampled randomly from among the population.For example, given a hypothetical population size of 1000 with 900 negative examples and 100 positive examples, if we wished to find a sample of size 100 the FRsample would contain exactly 50 negative and 50 positive examples, whereas the FCsample would contain approximately 90 negative examples and only 10 positive examples.
Note, the FR-sample does not maintain the original distribution of the population in order to provide more positive training examples, whereas the FC-sample is a simple random sampling of the population.
Therefore, we propose that an effective and prudent evaluation of our prediction problem is to use the FR-sample as training data and the FC-sample as test data.
We adapt a feature set first derived in ( Hsu et al. 2006):1.
Indegree of u: popularity of the user 2.
Indegree of v: popularity of the candidate 3.
Outdegree of u: number of other friends besides the candidate; saturation of friends list 4.
Outdegree of v: number of existing friends of the candidate besides the user; correlates loosely with likelihood of a reciprocal link 5.
"Forward deleted distance": minimum alternative distance from u to v in the graph without the edge (u, v)6.
Backward distance from v to u in the graph 7.
Number of mutual interests between u and v 8.
Number of mutual friends w such that u → w 񮽙 w → v 9.
Number of schools that u and v list in common The last feature is a new one adopted by LiveJournal in recent years.
We refer the reader to ( Hsu et al. 2007) for details of efficient feature analysis.
The new implementation of bidirectional breadth-first search produces a speedup of several times.We concentrated in this work on predicting additions only rather than additions and deletions.
The target feature is the Boolean variable BecameFriends.
The novel contribution of this research, specifically, is the use of graph and link features, and their changes through time.
In order to describe the temporality of the graph data the feature set of each pair is shown in a three time-tick window starting with T 0 , T 1 , T 2 , and the proceeding feature set row is shifted to exclude the first time tick and include the next.
This is done until the final time tick is reached, giving 25 feature tuples for each pair u, v.Enumerating the differences in 28 individual time ticks was shown to be computationally expensive, effectively magnifying the complexity of the temporal feature extraction by the number of time ticks.Temporal data was thus gathered for 1000, 2000 and 4000 u, v pairs.
And four training sets were created: FR and FC with and without link features for each size in the same manner as described in the above section on the atemporal data set.
Data was generated for 1000, 2000 and 4000 u, v pairs.
Furthermore, we modified the feature extraction algorithm to generate four total sets of training data for each size:1.
Fixed Ratio (FR) with Graph Features 2.
FR without Graph Features 3.
Fixed Count (FC) with Graph Features 4.
FC without Graph Features 6 The nominal attribute becameFriends is denoted as yes if pair u, v was not friends before T 0 and was friends after T 28 , and no otherwise.
As proposed in the previous section, our atemporal experiment was evaluated in two ways: (1) trained with FRsample data and tested with FC-sample data (FR/FC), (2) 10-folds cross validation on FC-sampled data (FC/FC).
With this atemporal data the WEKA implementation of the J48 algorithm was run.
The results are shown in Table 1.
FC/FC results were expectedly poor because in many cases the training sample had only 4 or 5 positive examples for training.
In fact, FC/FC on graph features recorded 0 positive examples correctly through all sample sizes.
However, when FR-sample data is used for training (FR/FC) the results are noticeably higher.
Furthermore, the differences in results of experiments with graph features only and experiments with all features are minimal; this observation is consistent with earlier work.
Data was again generated for 1000, 2000 and 4000 u, v pairs similar to the atemporal results except that each feature tuple was replicated as 񮽙 񮽙 , , 񮽙 , etc. as described in the earlier sections.
This realignment allows the inducer to learn temporal actions that may lead to changes in the friendship status of a pair.
This hypothesis is empirically shown to be true in Tables 2-4.
Table 3 shows promising results, in that, even though very few positive examples were used in validation because the FC-sample data contains only 񮽙5% positive examples (which correspond to the population's original distribution).
In our final experiment, we train and cross validate inducers with FC-sample data.
The results are shown in Table 4.
As table 4 shows, J48 is able to learn a predictor for the time series problem documented in earlier sections that achieves 100% accuracy, precision, and recall on (10-fold) cross validation data.
This performance is far superior to that of logistic regression and OneR, as well as compared to that of the atemporal predictor whose results are shown in earlier in this section.
Relational attributes include pair-dependent attributes such as mutual interests, friends, schools, etc. and link-dependent attributes such as causal explanations for a friendship (how two people met and what their relationship is) and reported outcomes of the friendship (what they self-identify as having done together).
There are two ways in which our time series and relational data models can be combined to produce an enriched overall data model for link change prediction:1.
Incorporate previously derived relational attributes into the time series.
This can be done using classical time series analysis methods such as: a. windowing: expanding the definition of a tuple or "feature vector" (attribute vector) to include values of a feature at different time lags b. smoothing: finding an exponential trace or moving average of an attribute 2.
Incorporate summative attributes of the time series into the relational model.
This can be done using time series filters and aggregation methods such as: a. moment analysis: finding the mean, variance, skewness, and kurtosis of specific quantitative variables over time and using these moment values as attributes b. queuing theoretic parameter estimation: using statistical inference with a process model (e.g., Poisson or Weibull analysis) to find waiting times for events such as adding or deleting friends (or groups of friends) We are continuing to add relational features cf. [HKPW07] that are part of the overall data model.
This research was supported in part by an NSF ITR and NSF FIBR grant.
We thank Vikas Bahirwani for contributions to the third implementation of the feature construction system, Jan Crow for helpful discussions on statistical analyses, Todd Easton for suggestions on algorithms for graph feature analysis, and Daniel Andresen for recommendations on data acquisition and change prediction.
