Descriptions of Submitted Runs High-Level feature extraction  A_DCON1_1: Choose the best-performing classifier from the following runs for each concept. 
A_DCON2_2: linear weighted fusion of 4 SVM classifiers using color/texture, parts-based classifier, and tf-idf text classifier. 
A_DCON3_3: same as above, except a new input-adaptive fusion method was used. 
A_DCON4_4: average fusion of 4 SVM classifiers using color/texture, parts-based classifier, and naïve Bayesian text classifier. 
A_DCON5_5: same as above, except the naïve Bayesian text classifier was not fused. 
A_DCON6_6: Choose the best-performing uni-model visual classifier among the 4 SVM's and parts-based classifier for each concept.
No classifier fusion was done. 
A_DCON7_7: a single SVM classifier using color and texture trained on the whole training set (90 videos) with 20% negative samples.
Search  I_C_2_ColumbiaI1_1: Interactive system, using text search (against ASR/MT), content-based image retrieval, story-based browsing, text search against visual concepts, and near-duplicate detection. 
I_C_2_ColumbiaI2_2: Interactive system, using text search (against ASR/MT), content-based image retrieval, story-based browsing, text search against visual concepts, near-duplicate detection, and Cue-X re-ranking. 
I_C_2_ColumbiaI3_3: Interactive run where an annotator spends the entire duration annotating the output from an automatic run.
The automatic run uses query-class-dependent weights on text retrieval, content-based image retrieval, and text search against visual concepts. 
M_C_2_ColumbiaM1_4: Manual run using ASR/MT text retrieval, content-based image retrieval, and text search against visual concepts. 
F_C_2_ColumbiaA1_5: Multimodal automatic run.
Uses query-class-dependent weights on text retrieval, content-based image retrieval, text search against visual concepts, and Cue-X reranking  M_A_1_ColumbiaM2_6: Required manual baseline run, using only text searches against the ASR/MT transcript. 
F_A_1_ColumbiaA1_7: Required automatic baseline run, using only text searches against the ASR/MT transcript.
In TRECVID 2005, we specifically explored the potential of parts-based statistical approaches in detecting generic concepts.
Parts-based object representation and its related statistical detection models [1] have gained great attention in the computer vision community in recent years.
This is evidenced by promising results reported in conferences like CVPR, ICCV, and NIPS.
We analyzed their performance and compared them with some of the state of the art approaches known from the TRECVID feature detection results in the previous years.
We adopted a general approach and applied the same technique to all of the 10 concepts.
One of our main objectives was to understand what types of high-level features would benefit most from such new representation and detection paradigm.For the baseline method, we adopted the SVM-based method over two simple visual features -color moments over 5x5 fixed grid partitions and Gabor texture from the whole frame.
We limited the features to the above two, fixed the grid partitions, and did not include other classification models (e.g., co-training).
Such baseline technique, although simple, has been shown competitive in past TRECVID experiments and literature [2].
In the TRECVID 2005 results, it actually achieved a quite satisfactory performance with an MAP of 0.266 (within the 25% margin from the best MAP).
The parts-based paradigm nicely complements the above baseline approach.
It represents each image as an attributed relational graph (ARG), with each node corresponding to a salient part (e.g., corner, high-entropy patch) that is automatically extracted from the image at different scales.
It captures the local attributes associated with each part as well as the spatial relationships among the parts.
Given a collection of training images and their extracted parts, a Random ARG model is then learned with machine learning techniques to maximize the data generation likelihood.
Intuitively, the parameters of the Random ARG model, once learned, are able to capture the underlying statistical properties of the part attributes and the inter-part topological and attributive relationships.
Such properties tend to correspond to the uncertainty caused by photometric, geometric, or imaging condition variations of objects in the real world.
To enhance the classification performance, discriminative schemes are also incorporated to the individual nodes, making the overall approach a hybrid one (both discriminative and generative), rather than purely discriminative in SVM.
Furthermore, the image representation is local and structural, instead of global or block-based.
From the TRECVID 2005 results (see Figure 1), the parts-based approach significantly improved upon the baseline, consistently for every concept.
The MAP was increased by about 10%.
For the "US Flag" concept, the improvement by fusing the parts-based detection with the baseline was as high as 25%, making it the best performing run.
In contrast, the improvement by fusing text-based classifiers was marginal, only 2-3% in MAP.
Fusion of multiple classifier instances of the same baseline model (by varying the training pools or SVM parameters) also resulted in small performance differences.
This confirms that parts-based approach is powerful for detecting generic visual concepts, especially those dominated by the local attributes and topological structures.
For the search task, we explored several novel approaches to leveraging cues from the audio/visual streams to improve upon standard text and image-example searches in all three video search tasks.
We employed "Cue-X re-ranking" [3] to discover relevant visual clusters from rough search results; "concept search" to allow text searches against concept detection results; and "near duplicate detection" [5] for finding re-used footage of events across various sources.
We also apply our story segmentation framework [3,4] and share the results with the community.
In the end, we find that each of these components provides significant improvement for at least some, if not all, search topics.
Combinations of these new tools achieved top AP for four topics (Mahmoud Abbas, fire, boat, people/building) and good performance for an additional ten topics.
We develop an analysis tool [8] to take an in-depth look at the logs from interactive runs and gain insight into the relative usefulness of each tool for each topic.The story segmentation algorithm uses a process based on the information bottleneck principle and fusion of visual features and prosody features extracted from speech [3,4].
The approach emphasizes the automatic discovery of salient features and effective classification via information theory measures and was shown to be effective in the TRECVID 2004 benchmark.
The biggest advantage of the proposed approach is to remove the dependence on the manual process in choosing the mid-level features and the huge labor cost involved in annotating the training corpus for training the detector of each mid-level feature.
For this year's data different detectors are trained separately for each language.
The performance, evaluated with TRECVID metrics (F1), is 0.52 in English, 0.87 in Arabic, and 0.84 in Chinese.
The results were distributed to all active participants.
In our experiments, the story segmentation was used primarily to associate text with shots.
We found that story segmentation improves text search almost 100% over ASR/MT "phrase" segmentation.
In the interactive system, we also enabled exploring full stories and find that a significant number of additional shots can be found this way, especially for named person topics.Near-duplicate detection [5] uses a parts-based approach to detect duplicate scenes across various news sources.
In some senses, it is very similar to content-based image retrieval, but is highly sensitive to scenes which are shown multiple times, perhaps from slightly different angles or with different graphical overlays on various different channels.
It rejects image pairs where general global features are similar and retains only pairs with highly similar objects and spatial relationships.
We apply near-duplicate detection in interactive search as a tool for relevance feedback.
Once the searcher finds positive examples through text search or some other approach, they can look for nearduplicates of those positive shots.
We have found that duplicate detection, on average, tends to lead to double the number of relevant shots found when used in addition to basic text, image, and concept searches.In our concept search approach, we enable text searches against the visual content of the images.
Both the text queries and subshots are represented in an intermediate concept space, containing confidences for each of the 39 concepts.
The subshots are represented by the outputs of the concept detectors for each of the concepts, smoothed according to the frequencies of each concept and the reliability (performance) of each concept detector.
The text queries are mapped into the concept space by measuring the semantic similarity between the terms in the query and the terms in the concept's description (via Renick's WordNet-based metric).
The subshots are ranked according to their distance from the text query in concept space.
This approach is applied to automatic, manual, and interactive searches with high performance in the few topics which have high-performing correlated concepts (such as "boats," "cars and roads," "military vehicles," "people with banners," and "tall buildings").
Cue-X re-ranking [3] is applied to both automatic and interactive search to re-rank the search results by balancing the visual features and pseudo-relevance labels using a framework based on the information bottleneck principle.
In the automatic task, we apply the re-ranking to basic story-level text searches.
Highly-ranked results are taken as pseudo-positive and lower-ranked results are pseudo-negative.
The framework learns the recurrent relevant and irrelevant low-level patterns from the estimated pseudo-labels in the rough search results and reorders them according to the smoothed cluster relevance.In the automatic task, re-ranking improves MAP over the story text baseline by 15%, with particularly good results in sports and named person topics.
In the interactive task, the hard negative and positive labels from the searcher can be fused with rough search scores to estimate pseudo-labels for further relevance clustering, but the improvement is somewhat more muted since interaction already focuses a great number of positives high in the search results and re-ranking further down the list has less of an effect.The following table shows the relative contribution from each tool in our multi-modal automatic run in TRECVID 2005.
Note the MAP shown below (0.114) is slightly different from our NIST official result (0.1) for the automatic run after we corrected a coding bug.
For interactive runs, we have integrated all of the above tools into a single interactive search system, including text search against ASR/MT transcripts, text search over automatically detected visual concepts (39 from LSCOM-Lite), story-based browsing, near-duplicate detection, content-based image retrieval (based on a single color featuregrid color moments), and cue-X re-ranking.
Figure 2 shows the performance of our two interactive runs, compared with the max and median performance among all NIST TRECVID 2005 runs.
We have kept detailed logs of user actions including the queries that were issued, the browsing views that were used, and times at which positive shots were found and saved.
We have developed a system for analyzing and visualizing these logs [8], which leads us to a greater understanding of the types of searches and browsing modes that are most useful for various types of queries.
Looking at interactive search results, we see that we achieve the top overall performance on three topics: 160 (fire), 164 (boat), and 162 (entering building).
Log analysis helps us gain a deeper of why these topics were answered so well.
Figure 3 and 4 compare the percentages of true relevant results found by using each tool (near-duplicate vs. search followed by subshot browsing vs. storybased browsing) by each of two interactive searchers.
For boats and people entering buildings (in Figure 3Figure 3), we find that concept search provides a strong topic baseline and duplicate detection can double the number of relevant shots found.
We also found that we can achieve performance close to the best for a number For fire (in Figure 4), text and content-based image search work well to find a few examples.
Browsing into the stories for those found examples can double the number of relevant shots found and then using duplicate detection for all of those found shots can more than quadruple the found shots.
Analyzing the logs, we can see that the formula for success for each of these topics involves finding some positives through some method and then browsing through the near-duplicates.
The methods for finding the most results, though, vary by topic.
For the named persons, text search and story browsing will turn up a good deal of results.
Duplicate browsing will then turn up a significant number more results, usually from different sources, where the ASR/MT failed or the person's name is not mentioned.
For some of the other topics (banners, palm trees, roads/cars, and military vehicles), concept search works particularly well, while for other topics (shaking hands and soccer) we have to rely on other approaches.In addition to the above major components, we have also developed anchor shot detection [7] and query-class dependent retrieval models [6] and tested them in TRECVID 2005 search, although the relative contributions of these components have not been shown to be as significant as others mentioned earlier.
We have experimented with a variety of new video search tools and found each to be quite powerful in various applications: near-duplicate detection for interactive search; Cue-X re-ranking for automatic text search; concept search for concept-related topics; and story detection for text/shot association and interactive browsing.
